Introduction

The marriage of corpus linguistics and social science seems, initially, straightforward. Much work in corpus linguistics has oriented itself towards real world problems, including in areas such as climate change research (e.g.

This paper explores these issues, looking, at an abstract level but illustrated through examples, at the interaction between corpus linguistics and the social sciences. We will begin by looking at epistemology, arguing that this is a major driver of corpus linguistics' integration with, or separation from, the social sciences. In doing so, we will outline our own epistemology and suggest a route that corpus linguistics may take in debates around epistemology in the social sciences. The route proposed should, in our view, maximise corpus linguistics' engagement with disciplines across the social sciences. However, we will also explore the varied nature of the social sciences, which is such that even a single discipline within the social sciences may exhibit significant internal variation in focus, theory and epistemology. We will see that such variation can militate for, or against, interaction with corpus linguistics. Throughout our discussion of epistemological concerns, we will note debates within corpus linguistics that echo these debates in the social sciences.

The paper then narrows in focus to look at a group of related areas in the social sciences that might have much to offer corpus linguistics. Following from that, we consider how data processing procedures in corpus linguisticsin terms of corpus mark-up, annotation and exploitationappear to be converging, to an extent, with those in (especially qualitative) social science. In terms of quantitative analyses, we observe how there is much in common between corpus linguistics and the social sciences anyway. Likewise, we also consider how social science theory is exerting influence on studies in corpus linguistics. We conclude by reflecting on the nature of evidence, falsification and corroboration in corpus use in the social sciences.

Epistemological fit

Since the mid-nineteenth century at least, the idea of dealing with the social in the same way as the physical has been pursued

There is, at least superficially, clear potential for alignment between corpus linguistics and naturalism. The approaches taken, for example, by researchers working in the field of social physics (see

A further reason we will turn from the approach taken by naturalism is that the results have been, with regard to the study of language at least, often produced in the absence of input from linguists. As a consequence, such results have been, at times, naïve and insupportable from the perspective of linguistics. For example, a team of Danish and Japanese physicists analysed dialect maps developed in Japan to explore the diffusion of swearwords across Japan over time

Studies in social physics, such as that by

In the third feature of naturalism, we find another stumbling block for the corpus linguist engaging with the social sciences. The call for methods which permit a positivist approach is where quantification comes in as, regarding a values free approach, it 'is commonly believed that this is achieved in natural science by the use of quantitative methods, so social science should, as far as possible, follow the same path'

The forced 'equivalence to quantitative criteria of "good" research practice'

Late nineteenth century Germany provided the arena in which the social sciences split between positivism, as we have explored, and conventionalism.

We might ask, what is the principal anti-positivist objection? Put simply, this rests on an examination of one of the features of positivism already discussedthat positivists generally believed that the world existed independently of the observer and that through observation one could come to know that world. Through valuefree, objective observations subsequently analysed using the scientific method, positivists believed one could come to certain knowledge of the world. The critique of positivism runs along predictable linescertainty in the social world is not a possibility; the social observer cannot be separated from the social object of inquiry, and this, in turn, gives rise to questions regarding the objectivity of the observations made.

While the terminology of the philosophy of science may be slightly alien to corpus linguists, then, the concepts are not. Moreover, it is advisable for corpus linguists to be cognisant of such concepts and the debates surrounding them, as these are likely to colour the perception that social scientists form of corpus linguistics. Indeed, in the literature we can see objections to corpus linguistics which follow the anti-positivist critique, most notably with reference to context and subjectivity. To begin with context, it is unsurprising to see this critique, as it is precisely the critique which spawned the qualitative/quantitative divide in the first place (i.e. the belief that the social can only be studied in a broad, potentially amorphous context of which the observer is a part). It is context that forms the thrust of

So how a corpus linguist positions themself in the epistemological debate is important in interacting with the social sciences. Not all approaches to using corpus data stray towards positivism to the extent that the critique expressed by the likes of Zoldan holds. One such position, adopted here from

with its emphasis upon argument and experience, with its device 'I may be wrong and you may be right, and by an effort we may get nearer to the truth', is […] akin to the scientific attitude. It is bound up with the idea that everybody is liable to make mistakes, which may be found out by himself, or by others, or by himself with the assistance of the criticism of others. It, therefore, taken by corpus linguistics, position and that of the anti-positivists. The alignment is not complete; howeverwhile the critique in favour of introspection denies the utility of corpus linguistics on similar grounds to those of the anti-positivists, the scientia rationalis approach of the Chomskyans is clearly strongly aligned to a logical form of positivism. See

Corpus linguistics and social sciences

suggests the idea that nobody should be his own judge, and it suggests the idea of impartiality

Disciplinary scope and interaction

It would be ideal to be able to align corpus linguistics and the social sciences and identify those areas which align and those which do not. However, such an approach would be naïve because the scope of the social sciences is uncertain. Also, within any subject within the social sciences, the orientation towards the study of language may vary. In addition, for any research area or even, perhaps, individual researcher, epistemological choices may differ. All of this complicates the formation of bridges between corpus linguistics and the social sciences.

The scope of the social sciences is both broad and indistinct. As such, deciding precisely what 'counts' as a social science may be a vexing task. Inevitably, a degree of arbitrary choice is involved in deciding exactly which subjects to include under the label, and likewise in deciding which to exclude from it. However, no matter what parameters are used, the field is wide and varied. By way of example, the UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) includes the following subjects in its definition of the social sciences: area and development studies; demography; economics; economic and social history; education; environmental planning; human geography; linguistics; management and business studies; politics and international studies; psychology; science and technology studies; social anthropology; social policy; social work; social statistics (including methods and computing); socio-legal studies; and sociology. Some of these subjects engage with the study of language to a degree (psychology and sociology, for example), some might conceivably have research questions to which linguists could contribute (social work and education, for example), while others may be focused so far away from language that the likely interaction with linguistics is marginal at best (social statistics, for example).

In one sub-field of corpus linguistics, CADS, alone we see substantial engagement with the social sciences, including with areas such as Business and Administration, Education, Health, Law, Politics and Religion

Sub-area may also impact not just on the question of engagement with corpus linguistics, it may even influence whether we view the subject as a whole as being part of the social sciences, or whether only parts of it truly are. For example, in linguistics, applied linguistics is clearly a part of the social sciences while the study of phonetics and phonology is less clearly so. That is not to say that there is no role for phoneticians within the social sciences. Rather, the claim is that the scale and intensity of the interaction of linguistics with the social sciences varies as the subfields of linguistics and other social sciences interact. Thus, an engagement with the work of syntacticians and phoneticians, for example, is probably strongest in an area like developmental psychology and weak-to-non-existent across the rest of the social sciences. By contrast, the work of applied linguists, especially those working in discourse analysis, interacts quite strongly across the social sciences by comparison, with areas of particular intensity being education, management and legal studies, sociology and socio-legal studies. This has consequences for corpus linguisticsthose areas which routinely draw upon corpus approaches, for example CADS (see Nartey and Mwinlaaru 2019, for an overview), the broad area of teaching and language corpora (e.g. Flowerdew and Brezina 2017) and corpus approaches to language and cognition (e.g. Gries and Stefanowitsch 2006) may find their work more broadly engaged with across the social sciences.

Importantly, the degree to which the engagement of social scientists with corpus linguistic research will occur varies, once more, according to epistemology.

To focus once more upon discourse analysis, while work situated within critical discourse analysis, rooted largely in an anti-positivist tradition, is widespread across sociology, anti-positivists undertaking critical discourse analyses are unlikely to accept the relevance of CADS. Indeed, within linguistics, Fairclough presents a defence of a critical discourse analysis which largely eschews corpusbased approaches

The area of the social sciences that arguably comes closest to some of the methodological concerns of corpus linguistics is demographic studies and the related area of social surveys. The problems faced by such researchers are similar to those faced by corpus linguiststhey often wish to characterise a population which is far too large to encompass fully. This leads to modelling of the population via sampling regimes. Demographers, for example, want to see how social and cultural factors impact upon that population. The variables are too many to define, leading to models of the population, and its interactions, being developed based on a sub-set of characteristics. Within the population, even with the limited set of characteristics observed, intersections between the characteristics give rise to further complexity. That complexity is, in turn, compounded because the interaction of the population with social and cultural variables also varies through space and time, leading to questions about how to measure change in the observed population across space (see

If one were to conceive of language as one of the cultural and social variables that interacts with a population, then the link between the methodological concerns of demography and social surveys on the one hand, and corpus linguistics on the other, becomes clear. It is therefore surprising that interaction between these areas has been fleeting at best. This is in part because demographers in particular are not directly interested in language but also because many linguists show minimal interest in some of the broader questions that demographers and survey-based social researchers ask and, hence, do not necessarily see the value of their datasets. However, for corpus linguists, such datasets can provide some of the crucial context that would allow them to contextualise their observations. Some work in corpus linguistics has drawn on such resources, including panel survey data (e.g. Baker 2005; Blinder and Allen 2014)

Even where such data might be of use to a corpus linguist, the concerns of the demographer or social survey researcher are unlikely to be a direct point of contact for the corpus linguist. The demographer is typically interested in questions relating to patterns of births, deaths and marriages. These are approached largely through numeric data, often gathered either from public records or social surveys. While it might be conceivable that such information could be of importance to linguistsfor example, those looking for cohort effects in language change might conceivably be interested in varying patterns of birth and deathmost linguists would have no use for such data. Likewise, most social demographers have no use for data about language, except in so far as, perhaps, it represents a variable which might explain a feature of a social process they are examining, such as looking for alignments between inequality and language spoken by migrants (see

When looking to a subject like demography, it is possible that corpus linguists, seeing also the scale of investment in that area, may assume that some problems they have may be answered once and for all. For example, that demographers will have the answer to how to build a perfectly representative spoken corpus. However, a striking feature of demography research is that it is built upon the type of pragmatism that

have, called for:

There are certain properties that demographers would like their data to possess. Taken literally these desiderata are of the nature of ideals in that even in the most advanced countries they are never fully attained. Nonetheless, they are goals that should be kept in view.

Data processing

An obvious area where a fruitful cross-fertilisation can occur between corpus linguistics and the social sciences relates to data processing and theory. There have almost been shadow developments occurring between corpus linguistics and the social sciences in this area. The most obvious area in which the social sciences have shadowed developments in corpus linguistics is corpus markup.

Corpus linguistics has long championed, and pioneered, markup schemes to permit the systematic encoding of metadata and interpretative analyses within corpora. Starting from a disparate range of mark-up schemes that were almost bespoke to individual corpus research centres (see

A key area where this interoperability is beginning to encourage crossfertilisation is in software packages used to annotate corpora. Nowadays, many concordance packages, such as SketchEngine and LancsBox, have annotation packages built in, enabling automated annotation of features such as parts-of-speech, parsing and even semantic annotation. Some packages help analysts introduce manual annotations, but these are fewer and less well developed, generally, that the automated systems. For example, in CQPweb, it is possible to categorise examples according to an annotation scheme and then to use the scheme to explore the data. The emphasis of corpus software packages tends to be on quantitative exploration and automated annotation.

By contrast, in many ways, software tools in the social sciences that facilitate textual analysis are oriented towards qualitative researchers and focus squarely on providing support for manual text annotation. Packages in the social sciences such as NVivo and Altas.ti are, arguably, very helpful packages for corpus linguists to use, especially where they are introducing manual annotations to corpus data, as this process is analogous to some of the typical uses of these packages (e.g. adding interpretative labels to interview data). The cross-fertilisation of corpus linguistics and the social sciences via the use of packages like NVivo is now quite marked; at the time of writing, Google Scholar lists over 20,000 academic outputs that mention corpus and NVivo, covering research in areas as disparate as anthropology

Nonetheless, what one can do with a corpus using a package such as NVivo is limited from the perspective of corpus linguistics, and this has consequences for studies in which only a package like this is used to analyse a corpus, of whatever size. NVivo has some strengths that corpus linguists should consider seriously. For example, it is a good environment for adding annotations to a text, it has excellent multimedia capabilities, and it is XML-compatible. However, it also has limitations. Notably, NVivo is not a good source of frequency data, as the types of frequency lists that are common in corpus analysis packages are absent. Likewise, a host of techniques that many corpus linguists would want to use are absent, including collocation analysis and keyword analysis. This, of course, is not to say that NVivo is flawed; for what it was designed fornamely, coding in the context of relatively small-scale qualitative studies -NVivo is excellent. By the same token, where it exceeds the abilities of some corpus tools, it is not necessarily the case that those corpus tools are lacking; they were simply developed for a different set of users.

Used together, standard corpus tools and packages such as NVivo could represent a powerful combination for users interested in building, manually annotating and exploiting corpora. This is especially the case for multimedia corpora, as shown in

While NVivo or other such tools can be used to input annotations, the question of what is annotated is more important than how that annotation is carried out. Put simply, this question goes something along the lines of, 'what is our analytical scheme and what value does it have in aiding the process of interpretation?'. This is a question that is shared by linguistics and other areas of the social sciences, so it is perhaps understandable that annotation schemes are another area where there has been a flow of ideas between corpus linguistics and the social sciences. It is important to note that those schemes often arise from theory, so theories from the social sciences have become, at least indirectly, influential in corpus linguistics: corpus linguistics has provided insights into texts, which have been interpreted through various theories, including cultural theory

There is a reverse flow from this trend, too. Each time the epistemological position of a researcher guides them to explore a theory through a corpus, the corpus plays a crucial role. More specifically, the corpus holds the theory accountable to quasi-reality and permits the possibility of falsification or corroboration

Corpus users need, of course, to be mindful of what corroboration in particular means. It does not guarantee that the theory is 'right', nor does it mean that this one theory alone will fit the data observed. The theoretical under-determination of corpus data ensures that this is the case

At this point, we also need to accept that in science as well as social science, the choice of theories which our data supports may be more sociological than scientific. Here, the ideas of philosophers of science such as

Perhaps there are special virtues that all and only true theories can be expected to have, such as simplicity, coherence and explanatory power. Or perhaps one theory is chosen over another because it has special advantages, maybe it solves problems that are particularly pressing at the moment, Maybe a worldview dictates. Maybe scientists get excited by the new ideas of the most recent theory or by the newest methods and concepts from other disciplines. Or perhaps adopting a particular theory serves some special interest groups over other or fits better with our view of prejudices

Conclusions

The engagement between the social sciences and corpus linguistics is Proteanin some areas it is dynamic and growing, in others etiolated, and yet in others it is nonexistent and unlikely to grow. The varying linkage between the two can, at times, be explained simply by circumstancethe two areas have yet to gainfully interact, though they may in principle. However, there are also active barriers to interaction rooted in epistemology that are as intransigent and, in fairness, as principled as some of those that exist within linguistics which have stopped some linguists from using corpus methods. Over the years, corpus linguistics has made progress in its home discipline by being results-focused and by spawning new theories that use the data made available by corpus analyses. By showing positive results and new, productive theories, users of corpus data in linguistics have been able to tilt the scales in favour of corpus use. The same is possible in the social sciences.

However, in both linguistics and the social sciences, other methods are also competing for attention. In particular, data science or 'big data' methods are producing results and demanding the attention of social scientists more broadly. The work produced by such researchers often aligns much more strongly with naturalism than corpus linguistics does. While this may, in light of what has been outlined in this paper, prove to be an opportunity for corpus linguists, allowing them to appeal to social science researchers who wish to engage with corpus data but not to shift towards positivism, it will only be so if two conditions are met. Firstly, corpus linguists need to be clear about their own epistemologies. If they are not, it is very easy to bracket corpus linguistics together with approaches to language data which, very often, are free of any serious reflection upon the nature of language in the social world. Secondly, corpus linguists need to be clear when marking this distinction. These two conditions have another, valuable, consequence. One thing that corpus linguists should be clear aboutas should researchers using any method or set of methodsis that while a corpus can answer a range of questions worth asking, it cannot answer all questions that a researcher may reasonably have. Accordingly, corpus linguistics is bound to be, and has been, used as one methodological approach amongst many in studies which use mixed methods and orient to triangulation. In being clear about what makes corpus linguistics distinct and what it has to offer, the role of corpus linguistics as offering one further methodological tool in the researcher's toolbox in the social sciences Corpus linguistics and social sciences will be easier to make, and the engagement of corpus linguistics with the social sciences will be more easily facilitated.