Introduction

The implementation of a corpus in the field of linguistics has grown rapidly over the decades. Corpus in the simple term is defined as the compilation of texts that has been gathered for a specific reason

In this regard, the increase of corpus mechanisms and systems has qualified those who have great intentions to do studies all over the world to carry out research in their various localities with lower obstruction. Through years, corpus mechanisms have moved out the domain of verifiable research in relevance to linguistic studies and language education to the use of corpora to serve certain functions in conducting research in specific areas of study. In fact, it has been progressively widespread for researchers to use corpus technology in their

Research Methods

The essence of this review is on the modern corpus and corpus-based research conducted by researchers affiliated with different common-section institutions all over the world. The study was bounded to input obtainable in common scopes, such as scholarly databases, journals, and books. Each selected newly published journal and outstanding study is checked out to select studies in relevance to how language corpus has been employed by those who conduct studies to treat a different sequence of themes in their recent scholarly efforts, concentrating particularly on how their essential studies have been fulfilled in Applied Linguistics. When a researcher taking part in corpus-based research is recognized, his/her names are employed as key terms to deal for research offspring in basic scholastic data. A total of 20 are divided based on focus. Table

Results and Discussion

Extending across an enormous domain of themes, the 20 studies are categorized based on target readers or their major research attentions. Six majors are set; data contained in table

Teaching and Learning

A sum of 12 studies has employed corpora to respond to a research question binding to language teaching and learning, containing one edited book

Besides, to study the main shifts that corpora have fetched to language education, first, however, Hyland (2013) in his study titled "Corpora and innovation in English language education" presents a requisite arranger on what corpora are and how they are employed. Corpora have been at the front of two of the most important variations in language education in latest years. On one aspect they have supplied teachers and materials preparers with more firm depictions of how language is designed and employed, disclosing the prevalent appearance of phrasal units as the foundation of idiomatic language use. On the other hand, they have simplified modern methodologies of teaching, sharing in a broad change from teaching as telling knowledge to teach as authentic learning. At present, corpora supply a means for applicants to occupy a more robust and reflexive part in their learning by discovering genuine instances of language. In the latest decade, then, we have seen corpora hard-done-by in domains as various as syllabus plan (Walsh, 2010), methodologies of classrooms (Ken Hyland, 2013), student grammar

Many projects also review relevant factors related to the use of corpora in higher education. In a certain study titled "Corpus Linguistics and its Applications in Higher Education" by Fuster Márquez & Clavel Arroitia (2010), they are set out to depict implied essentials of corpus linguistics and its progress in relevance to theoretical linguistics and its implementations in modern teaching pursuits. In these projects, they try to set up how diverse types of corpora have shared the progress of direct and indirect programs in language teaching. They identify Data-Driven Learning because of its relation to applied linguistics literature and check in detail merits and demerits. Finally, they resume problems in connection with the application of corpus linguistics in the classroom since knowledge of the restrictions of corpus linguistics is necessary for its coming prosperity.

Another study focused on "Corpus-based study of language and teacher education" by

Furthermore, the application of corpora in the field of language teaching and learning conveys a case-ofsystematic survey of outstanding progress on corpora conducted by researchers to address a diverse range of topics in their latest academic efforts, concentrating particularly on how their fundamental studies have been managed in Applied Linguistics. In this relevant topic, a number of articles work toward studying and presenting several types of research and projects in language corpora. It is, therefore, categorized into two primary sections in relation to their focus. On one hand, it normally supplies a preface to the domain of corpus linguistics and its high relevance to language teaching and learning. On the other, it conveys a concise summary of some concerning articles of the domain. Stepping from the articles presented at the 4th International Conference that was conducted to convey many topics in the domain of Corpus Linguistics (CILC2012, Jaén, Spain). These studies have several characteristics in general. They all use overall implementation of corpora and at the same time deal with topics relating to teaching and learning, the implied proposition being that a real and alternately useful link can be founded between teaching and research. With regard to this source, one and all frames a clear taking of the way that various corpora can be taken advantage of several ends.

Finally, two studies concentrated on improving systems of learning to reinforce learning depending on regarding corpus. Here students of Mainland /Hong Kong learn some lessons to improve their pronunciation (Cheng, 2011) that is depending on the learner's pronunciation corpora. The purposes of the suit are to characterize frequent pronunciation difficulties of leaners, along with providing remedies to learners and instructors in order to develop the accurate pronunciation of those who learn English. Another system relevant to corpus-based learning was existed to improve lexical-grammatical terms learning for majors of the English language

Linguistic Research

In relevant to linguistic research, there are 5 studies involving two improved books on corpus linguistics and corpus-based research in language studies (Cheng, 2011) and the book titled "Cluster Analysis for Corpus Linguistics" By

Besides, two studies have concentrated on specific language arts. In addition, Lukin et al., (2017) worked toward showing a new corpus, PersonaBank, composed of 108 specific stories from weblogs that have been commented with their story intention schemas, a profound picture of the fabula of a story. The themes of the stories and the base of the story intention scheme picture are depicted, along with the process of commenting on the stories to make the story intention schemes and the difficulties of conforming the tool to this new private narrative scope. It is also investigated how the corpus can be employed in implementations that tell the story differently using various styles of telling, co-telling, or like a content planner.

Cultural Studies

One project has a cultural focus. In this book titled Corpus Linguistics, Context, and Culture by Wiegand & Mahlberg (2019) Corpus Linguistics, Context and Culture explain the possibility of corpus linguistic methods for discussing language manners across a domain of contexts. Arranged in three parts, the chapters extend from accurate case studies on lexico-grammatical patterns to essential talks of meaning as section of the 'discourse, contexts, and cultures' topic. The last part of 'learner contexts' particularly indicates the requirement for mixed-method approaches and the regard of pedagogical implying for actual-world contexts. Beyond its assistance to existing discussions in the domain, this edited volume emphasizes fresh trends in cross-disciplinary work.

Corpus & Discourse Analysis

Discourse Analysis can also profit from corpus linguistics research. Two studies have made the use of corpus linguistic research to reinforce the capacity and efficiency of discourse analysis. One study titled "Using corpora in discourse analysis" by

Conclusion and Suggestion

This systematic review presents a glance at the latest studies that are done by researchers from various geographical locations all over the world. The variety of topics, the copra volume employed and languages studied to provide us a powerful tone that corpus and corpus-based research is a lifelike domain of research. Though we are not in a set to consider potential research trends, common types were regarded among the 20 studies.

In manifestations of languages studied, English language corpora are employed for the plurality of the studies (12 out of 20), while several studies use corpora of language (one out of 20) limited to the cultural studies. Meanwhile, corpora of Linguistic research (five) are used in some of the studies. The remaining two indicate the employment of corpora in discourse analysis. The language employed in the study includes both the spoken and written forms and involves a broad series of types like naturally occurring dialogue, academic writing, literary works, and media texts.

To sum up, a considerable numeral of noticeable corpora has been used and or improved by those who have great intentions to conduct researchers for their specific study. There are many instituted corpora used by the researchers. On top of that, several corpora were put together by the researchers themselves as part of their studies, which proves that language corpora have been improved and/or applied, by researchers to treat a various range of topics in their recent well-read efforts especially when their primary research projects have been conducted in Applied Linguistics.