Similarly, we assumed that it was possible, in principle, to recognize which of several senses of a word (such as pavement) we are dealing with in a given instance from the corpus; we saw that this assumption runs into difficulties very quickly, raising the more general question of how 3.2 Operationalization to categorize instances of linguistic phenomena in corpora.
In this chapter, you will gain practical experience in using corpus linguistic methodologies and interpreting results.
However, as mentioned above, one limitation of this corpus is that it is composed of transcripts from news programs and talk shows and thus the speech is likely to be more scripted or more carefully produced than informal registers of spoken English.
The mean rates for nouns drawn from every possible sample of size n that can be drawn from the population constitute the sampling distribution for this parameter.
Section 7.3 is devoted to comparative corpus annotations in the context of corpus-based typology.
The first word (w 1 ) occurs only in one text, at corpus positions 1 -5 -10 -15 and 20, while the second word (w 2 ) is evenly distributed at positions 1 -200,000 -400,000 -600,000 and 800,000.
One of the best known is the TEI format (Text Encoding Initiative), which makes it possible to encode many markings in a standardized way and make corpora sharing easier.
For each request, the interface returns an indication of the frequency rank of the word looked up in the corpus.
This separation, incidentally, is possible because most XML processors simply ignore any whitespace they 'perceive' as redundant.
In addition to exploring the various phrasal constellations we've just investigated above, this type of flexibility also makes it possible for us to research idioms to some extent.
The RD of a text is determined by counting all possible argument positions (S, A, P, obliques; cf.
One way to understand 27 Meta-analyzing Corpus Linguistic Research 663 meta-analysis is in parallel to primary research.
This is counterintuitive -does one really want to agree with id f that a lexical type which occurs once in a single document is a better criterion for document classification than one which occurs numerous times in a small subset of documents in the collection?
A basic question facing an ELF corpus is how different ELF is from English as a native language (ENL).
In corpus linguistics, the explicandum is typically some aspect of language structure and/or use, while the explicans may be some other aspect of language structure or use (such as the presence or absence of a particular linguistic element, a particular position in a discourse, etc.
She defined informational focus by adding up the number of normed counts for nouns, attributive adjectives, nominalizations, and prepositions in each of the courses she included in her corpus.
This is a visualisation of where a word or collocate occurs in a corpus.
Sample B, on the other hand, contains no reported speech and reporting verbs, although it's clearly also narrative -albeit non-fictional -, with a relatively complex sentence structure, including numerous relative and adverbial clauses, and an overall high degree of formality.
Compared with present-day corpora, this corpus is relatively small (one million words).
Let us look at one of Mair's examples and compare his results to those derived from more traditional corpora, namely the Corpus of Late Modern English Texts (CLMET), LOB and FLOB.
In addition, some frequency information was collected from the GloWbE corpus.
The CLAWS tagger, for example, assigns a hyphenated POS tag, referred to as an "ambiguity tag", when its tagging algorithm is unable to unambiguously assign a single POS to a word.
However, as XML forbids the use of overlapping tags, and overlap passages span across different speaker turns, using <overlap>…</overlap> elements would break the document's well-formedness, so it's best to use the empty tags <overlap type="start" /> and <overlap type="end" />, possibly in combination with a number ('n') attribute.
A more sophisticated way of establishing a direct link between the recorded speech signal and its annotation is offered by specialised software that is designed to build up time-aligned annotation of media files.
The second type of treebank annotations encodes dependency relations.
If this were not identified in advance as a semantically meaningful chunk meaning 'to ridicule or parody', then separate word counts for 'send' and 'up' would be observed and merged with the other occurrences of those words in the corpus, potentially incorrectly inflating their frequencies.
In the first type, we solely extracted the contextualized embeddings of the target words, and used them as the only features for training traditional off-the-shelf classification algorithms.
Still, if we want to use this operational definition, we have to stick with it and define hapaxes strictly relative to whatever (sub-)corpus we are dealing with.
The basic distinction in (28) looks simple, so that any competent speaker of a language should be able to categorize the referents of nouns in a text accordingly.
Yet, it is the text produced by them, and that will be the basis for comparison.
If our corpus represents a sample rather than the population (which is typically the case), we should consider the amount of evidence we have in the sample.
Section 1.4 contains a discussion of how the corpus methodology has many different applications.
In this section, I discuss how Open Corpus Linguistics can work in practice, and how it contributes to overcoming the pertinent problems addressed in Section 2.
First, it should start with a detailed description of the corpus used.
Scholars have used collocation analysis to study the discourse of sexual and gender difference.
In sum, concordancers make it possible to analyze recurrent properties in a corpus, such as its frequent words, its collocations and its keywords from a quantitative point of view, something which is not possible to infer from simply reading texts.
If your project involves comparing the frequency findings of sub-corpora in your corpus (or to another existing corpus), you will need to employ a simple statistical procedure known as "normalization" to ensure that your results are comparable (see a brief mention of this in Chapter 6).
As groupings normally capture, and we don't want whatever is supposed to be constraining our grouping to become part of the match, and thus be highlighted by the concordancer, these constructs actually use a special syntax that excludes them from being captured, which is that the opening bracket of the grouping parentheses is immediately followed by a question mark, i.e.
Attempting to transcribe speech of this nature in a purely linear manner is not only difficult but potentially misleading to future users of the corpus, especially if they have access only to the transcription of the conversation, and not the recording.
If you cannot make the full texts freely available for copyright reasons, try to make the corpus as accessible as possible, for example, by allowing queries via flexible search engines such as NoSketchEngine or CQPweb and by publishing word and lemma lists (and ideally, n-gram lists), or by publishing it in password-protected form via a repository that allows for closed-access corpora (e.g., CLARIN).
On the other hand, it might also be argued that the feature was not identified by previous corpus-based research so it is, by definition, not corpus-based.
In particular, all of the above approaches only deal with the minimal amount of information one should include-the more comprehensive information regarding token and type frequency distributions and entropies still awaits first exploration.
The main drawback of this kind of detailed transcription is the lengthy amount of time it takes to annotate a text with information about intonation.
Parsed versions of part of this corpus are now available and included in the Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Middle English and the Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Early Modern English.
While the term markup is sometimes used to indicate the physical act of marking specific parts of a text using specific symbols, and, in contrast, annotation may often refer to the interpretative information added, the two may also be used synonymously.
The high quality of bootstrapping methods in corpus linguistic research may actually be due in part to the slow and cautious pace at which they have been adopted.
The popularity of this type continues into the fourth period (o = 150, e = 93.3).
For this study, a good starting point would be to look for relative pronouns such as who or which in order to find occurrences of relative sentences in the corpus.
Above all, it is fundamental that any child recorded in the corpus has been diagnosed with ASD according to the diagnostic tests recognized in the literature, rather than following the mere indication of the pediatrician.
This case study shows how collocation research may uncover facts that go well beyond lexical semantics or semantic prosody.
To date, the largest corpora of the English language, Global Web-based English (GloWbE) (1.9 billion words), Bank of English (550 million words), and Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) (450 million words) contain relatively small amounts of spoken English, from 0 to 20 percent.
These difficulties do not keep corpus linguists from investigating grammatical structures, including very abstract ones, even though this typically means retrieving the relevant data by mind-numbing and time-consuming manual analysis of the results of very broad searches or even of the corpus itself, if necessary.
Today, lexicographers at Oxford, for example, have at their disposal a corpus of over 2 billion words that represent a range of material from different subject areas (e.g.
The main issue is to determine the criteria according to which it is advisable to classify the elements included in the corpus to ensure its representativeness.
Although corpus-based studies of language structure can look back on a tradition of at least a hundred years, there is no general agreement as to what exactly constitutes corpus linguistics.
The Corpus of Early English Correspondence (CEEC) project was the first and the work is still going on with a whole corpus family in the pipeline.
This is because the default option for the concordance module is to ignore case.
This issue, too, can be illustrated with the help of the same sample corpus from Hiltunen (2021), Corpus A, which comprises complete issues of the four newspapers sampled at 10-year intervals.
For example, in order to determine the geographical area of diffusion of a certain pronunciation trait, it is necessary to know where each speaker having contributed to the corpus came from.
Based on a comparison of our value (32.69) with the distribution, we can make a judgement about the statistical significance (pvalue) of the result.
It relates to the relative proportions of different types of data within a corpus.
As a result, nearly all concordancers and corpus linguistic tools will offer some assistance in the calculation of keyness.
It is hard to see how, without the corpus techniques or some extremely time-consuming substitute for them, any firm, objective statements on these matters could be made.
In the same way, the consultation interface for the CLAPI corpus (see section 5.3 for a description) does not currently provide information about the total number of words included in the portion of the corpus that is available for online consultation.
In a second for-loop for each line, we use substr to extract speaker/annotation names etc.
For instance, the Corpus of Supreme Court Opinions (cf.
The next method in the expanding corpus toolbox is usually referred to in the computational linguistics community as n-grams.
In addition, Lukin et al., (2017) worked toward showing a new corpus, PersonaBank, composed of 108 specific stories from weblogs that have been commented with their story intention schemas, a profound picture of the fabula of a story.
The key to this is in the two words "easily identifiable" because whatever codes you may insert in your file, those shouldn't easily be confused/confusable with any regular text.
If each word in a corpus has been tagged (i.e.
Such a focus in representativeness is motivated by a concomitant focused research agenda; for example, the communication during air traffic control (ATC) between pilots and air traffic controllers.
If you have a tagged corpus in which verbs and particles are tagged -e.g., the corpus would look like this: John_N picked_V the_D book_N up_P -then you don't want R to do greedy matching because of how that would handle sentences with two verb-particle constructions such as John_N picked_V up_P the_D book_N and_CJ brought_V it_PN back_P.
However, if we were to identify a set of 100 collocations with 𝑝-values of 0.001 in a corpus, we are potentially treating all of them as important, even though it is very probable that at least one of them reached this level of significance by chance.
TheSOM algorithm implements a particular type, the Voronoi tesselation , in which a reference vector is the centroid, and the area of k associated vectors surrounding the centroid is a neighbourhood; the neighbourhood of a given reference vector v r in a Voronoi tesselation is defined as the set of vectors closer to v r than to any other reference vector (ibid.
In this way the corpus text is searchable and users can grasp the meaning of specific passages.
Observations about an unrepresentative sample are not generalizable to the target population, and bootstrapping cannot change that.
For instance, whether a copular verb like is is realised in its full form or appears as a clitic 's is subject to numerous factors, and corpus linguists seek to identify these and relate them to one another in modelling the variation at hand (cf.
Unlike generative grammarians, corpus linguists see complexity and variation as inherent in language, and in their discussions of language they place a very high priority on descriptive adequacy, not explanatory adequacy.
What size a given corpus has will depend to a major extent on the kinds of texts included and the resources required to compile these into structured collections.
In corpus linguistics, bootstrapping has also been proposed as a method for quantifying the degree of homogeneity in a corpus sample, for validation of statistical results, and as a methodological step in random decision forests, an advanced classification method.
In pursuit of such a measure, Hilpert searched the OED quotations for all ment-types in the database, retrieving a concordance of 91,908 lines and approximately 655,000 words in total.
We have shown that the main difference between corpus linguistics and experimental linguistics is the way in which empirical data are collected.
The corpus contains conversations during spoken exams and in informal contexts, and amounts to approximately 15,000 words, 9,500 of which were produced by learners.
There have almost been shadow developments occurring between corpus linguistics and the social sciences in this area.
Another reason for documenting what is in the corpus is to enable researchers to draw on various variables in a systematic way when analyzing data from the corpus.
Taking this into account, we can now posit the following final definition of corpus linguistics: Definition (Final Version) Corpus linguistics is the investigation of linguistic research questions that have been framed in terms of the conditional distribution of linguistic phenomena in a linguistic corpus.
Many tools, among which we can mention EXMARaLDA, use the XML format, which is a coding language (eXtensible Markup Language) for defining, and then storing and transmitting structured data.
The corpus was compiled in 2005 and remains one of the largest freely accessible multimodal corpora in existence.
The first of these is the one you have already seen, a text form in natural human language.
For a corpus to be "representative," it must provide an adequate representation of whatever linguistic data is included in the corpus.
This chapter presents an introductory survey of computational tools and methods for corpus construction and analysis.
These issues are especially problematic given the otherwise positive trend that corpus-linguistic data and methods are now informing linguistic theorizing more than they have for a long time.
Since 2018, a new version has made it possible to consult the corpus by means of an improved interface, facilitating the search for regular expressions.
This limitation has led to Chomsky's third criticism of corpora, namely the fact that a corpus can never contain the whole of a language and that, therefore, the above-mentioned biases are not solvable.
The question marks at the beginning and end identify the tag on this line as a processing instruction, in our case specifically the one referred to as the XML declaration.
The corpus is, however, a reasonable model (or at least an operationalization) of this linguistic input.
However, associations in general and associative learning are certainly not (always) symmetric, which is why, ideally, corpus linguistics would explore the use of directional AMs.
The frequencies of several n-grams in the untagged Brown corpus 3.2.
In linguistics, a corpus is a collection of texts that serves as the empirical basis for the study of natural languages.
Once annotated, the elements of the corpus can be searched by their POS tags by means of a concordancer.
In other words, taking into account that old women are 6.6 Complex research designs underrepresented in the corpus compared to young women, there is a clear preference of all women for the s-possessive.
Charteris-Black's findings are intriguing, but since he does not compare the findings from his corpus of right-wing materials to a neutral or a corresponding left-wing corpus, it remains an open question whether the use of these metaphors indicates a specifically right-wing perspective on immigration.
The discourse elements that are best suited for a corpus quantitative analysis are those easily identified on the basis of raw data.
Representativeness is essentially unattainable given that we can never know what the population really looks like (and unlike pollsters we never have anything like election results come in against which we could evaluate our sampling procedures).
In order to allow the students to gain experience in "doing" corpus linguistics, we have intentionally limited the corpora and software used in the corpus projects.
The young speakers included in the corpus should proportionally represent the two genders and have different socio-economic profiles.
Thus, I will attempt in this chapter to sketch out a broad, and, I believe, ultimately uncontroversial characterization of corpus linguistics as an instance of the scientific method.
There are many corpus studies that compare lexemes, especially near-synonyms and purported synonyms.
More specifically, when researchers reuse a corpus created by other teams, they must mention in their publication the Internet link where the data were downloaded or retrieved from.
When we restricted our corpus queries to novels alone, which is possible if one uses the downloadable version of COHA rather than the online interface, the gender difference disappeared.
An alternative explanation for the emergence of the introductory references of corpus linguistics would be because the period was the optimal time for establishing corpus linguistics as a part of linguistics after a "hodgepodge" multi-directional development of corpus linguistics.
First and foremost, the concordance view with one word of interest aligned vertically in the middle of the text and the left and right context justified in the middle, is a way of visualising the patterns of the context of a particular word, and is the main way that corpus linguists engage with corpora.
Each of these properties should then be mirrored by the corpus sample proportionally to its prevalence in the population.
To decide this, we need objective evidence, obtained either by serious experiments (including elicitation experiments) or by corpus-linguistic methods.
Moreover, this enables users of the corpus to plan the construction of their queries targeting these annotations.
This brings us to the crucial feature of UDs, namely their cross-linguistic comparability.
Even if open access is not a requirement, in a case where a researcher is applying for funding to compile a corpus for a research project, it may be a good idea to include an entry in the budget for eventually making the corpus available.
Both approaches have their place in different kinds of corpus-based study.
This is because the longer a text becomes, the more likely it is to include any given feature.
A subset of the ELFA corpus was used to gain a maximal diversity of L1 backgrounds of the speakers.
The concordance arrangement with the search item aligned centrally in the middle of each line provides the main window on to the underlying text for a corpus linguist.
First, the corpus should contain French literature, which restricts the literary subject to works written in original French, rather than translations.
Once you're finished, you can just load the resulting file in AntConc instead of the original corpus, and filter out or sort the relevant entries in another concordance.
Therefore, the metadata of a corpus will include a list of correspondences between the chosen phonetic alphabet and the IPA.
The line between raising the level of analysis and the more general approach of principled metadata-based combining becomes blurred, however, in the case of, for example, combining Twitter tweets with their replies together to form individual texts.
It also demonstrated that such corpus-based studies may result in very specific hypotheses about the function of lexicogrammatical structures that may become the basis for claims about mental representation.
There are broadly two ways of doing so: first, in the corpus itself, and second, in a separate database of some sort.
In this book, we offer multiple opportunities to work on corpus projects by first including an entire chapter dedicated to smaller corpus projects (Chapter 4) and then providing students with information on how to build and analyze their own corpora (Part III).
It is equally important to consider the quality and type of microphone to be used to make recordings.
So it will be string, and it will be a nominal type of data (all strings are nominal).
While most of the corpus consists of novels, the most recent periods in the corpus include increasing amounts of drama, short stories and movie scripts, for example.
Ultimately names also contribute to the word count of a corpus, and it might also be beneficial to exclude named entities from automated calculations in cases where names -or other types of items in a corpus which may be irrelevant to what one is trying to assess by the calculations -do not reflect the active linguistic choices of the writers or speakers represented in the corpus.
For example, if you call up a concordance of the word difference, then you will most certainly find that the most frequent L1 collocate is the while the most frequent R1 collocate is between.
A corpus approach can be used then, in conjunction with a sociolinguistic question, to describe the distribution of the variants across such external contextual features.
In contrast, languages such as Java, Perl, Python, Ruby, and R have features tailored for both web and desktop environments, making them a common choice for many corpus tools.
Once again, it is important to note that the manual annotation was conducted on the level of clusters, rather than individual tweets, meaning that some non-contact-related occurrences may have been included in the counts.
It would be unrealistic, therefore, to expect that different POS-tagging algorithms for the same language will produce identical results.
Secondly, the corpus should be created by considering a specific idea.
Yet it is impossible to create a corpus of Old French that is comparable in any straightforward way to a corpus of Present-day French.
What are the modes, minimums, maximums, and ranges for token and type morpheme counts based on this sample?
This can also be advantageous with regard to the "mystery of vanishing reliability", that is, the phenomenon that each datapoint tends to become less reliable the more parameters (in corpus-linguistic terms, annotations) one adds.
For instance, the International Corpus of Learner English contains samples of written English from individuals who speak English as a foreign language and whose native languages include French, German, Portuguese, Arabic, and Hungarian.
Therefore, if a corpus is to be used only for non-profit academic research, this should be clearly stated in any letter of inquiry or email requesting permission to use copyrighted material and many publishers will sometimes waive fees.
The study of linguistic productions in a corpus and the manipulation of experimental variables both have their advantages and disadvantages.
Second, the expression collocates with verbs of expression (perhaps unsurprising for an expression relating to emotions); this, too, is true for our sample, where such verbs are found in 14 lines: reflect (line 2), show (lines 3, 9, 14, and 19), read (line 5), declare (line 6), disguise (line 7), reveal (line 8), hide (line 10), reveal (line 12), admit (line 13), give vent to (line 15), and tell (line 18).
A portion of the corpus contains narrative texts produced by CP and CE1 students (6-7 years old), while the other section is made up of a series of argumentative texts produced by CE2 and CM1 students (8-9 years old).
If a word appears five times in a corpus of 15,000 words, it would not be wise to conclude that this word would have a frequency of 500 occurrences in a corpus of 1,500,000 words.
It also depends on the decision of how many text categories are kept in a corpus, how many text samples are put in each category, and how many words are kept in each sample.
In our case study, we illustrated how this distinction is not absolute: some previous studies of discontinuous lexical frames (like Biber 2009 and Ro ¨mer 2010) are intermediate along this continuum, beginning with a corpus-driven approach to identify a set of continuous lexical sequences, but carrying out the corpus-based investigation of only those sequences, to analyze the extent to which they occur as discontinuous frames.
This bias can be introduced either indirectly by the topic of the task in that, for example, a large batch of essays on the topic of friendship in a corpus will lead to a disproportionally high frequencies of words and phrases that belong to the lexical field of friendship.
The paper thus shows that it is not appropriate to ignore lexical grouping factors and grouping factors derived from the corpus structure, especially as both are easy to annotate automatically.
There are, however, also many other applications of corpus linguistics I've been unable to cover, but which may be of interest to you now that you've mastered the basics, and which I'd like to mention here briefly.
The review in this section demonstrates that corpus linguistics has enabled large-scale collocation analysis and foregrounded collocation in linguistic research while corpus-based collocation studies over the past decades have uncovered a range of interesting collocational behavior and semantic prosody which have been hidden from intuition and can only be revealed by examining a large amount of attested data simultaneously.
On one level, researchers, language instructors and other users would like to be able to search through learner data directly: the base text is, trivially, whatever a learner may have written.
In the case of adjectives, their lemma is by convention the singular masculine form.
Also, the effects of demographic information on the use of specific linguistic constructions could be explored with the help of a corpus designed as a historical or diachronic corpus.
These categories are called the sampling frame.
A first pilot annotation phase should be used for testing these categories, as well as for identifying problematic cases and leading to the preparation of a more or less detailed annotation manual.
A further complication is that much writing, particularly scientific writing, is co-written, and if males and females collaborate, it will be difficult to determine precisely whose writing is actually represented in a sample.
We then present an overview of several applications of bootstrapping that have been used in prior corpus linguistics research.
Keeping quote tweets in the data would add repeated tweets to the corpus and also would add patterns and word counts that do not correspond to a specified account.
So, even when we are working with data in a digital format, the task of converting the original format into a usable format, based on the text, is still necessary, as we will see below.
For example, we can retrieve all the discourse markers using a concordancer, and then annotate their function in a file.
For example, the online interface on the OFROM corpus (see section 5.3) only offers the possibility of looking for productions by women or men, but for the moment does not indicate the total number of participants of each genre, or the number of words produced by each of them.
The corpus could also be student specific, which would greatly enhance feedback that a teacher gives.
However, Sketch Engine makes it possible to tag a corpus in French as well as in many other languages.
On the one hand, from the point of view of quantitative L2 analysis, these could thus be considered unwanted items or 'false positives' as their inclusion in word counts and concordance analyses will affect findings on what structures learners may have acquired and are able to produce.
Texts that exist only in printed or even handwritten form on paper require work on digitisation so that the text is machine-readable.
One exception is the lemma ardent, where KNN performs slightly better than SVM.
If the degree of expansion is high, then saturation is low (as is representativeness).
While it is generally accepted that any level below .05 indicates statistical significance, it is quite common for more stringent significance levels to be employed (e.g.
Include part-of-speech (PoS) filters to find the most common adjective and determiner w-1 and the most common verb and noun w+1 in each corpus.
It is highly likely that at some point in a corpus linguist's career, they will need to develop custom scripts to investigate their unique research questions.
Large text archives, such as Lexis-Nexis 5.
In some cases, the abundance of metadata requires the use of a precise syntax for tags, based on the conventions of computer languages for XML or SGML coding.
What distinguishes then our 1 The type of content of social media platforms is not restricted to only one.
Select one of the areas described in this section and briefly discuss how corpus methodology has changed the way that research is done in the area.
This kind of detail is included because creators of this corpus attached a high value to the importance of intonation in speech.
It is not inconceivable, for example, that male linguists constructing a spoken corpus will record their male colleagues in a university setting and their female spouses in a home setting.
These case studies are drawn from the vast body of corpus linguistic research literature published over the last thirty years, but they are all methodologically deconstructed and explicitly reconstructed in terms of the methodological framework developed in the first part of the book.
The actual text is in the Google Books "snippets" (e.g.
This ensures the extracted sample corpus is reasonably clean and can therefore be expected to provide reliable output for standard corpus linguistic tasks.
You look at a corpus of student presentations that includes nine presentations from each area (a total of 27 texts).
Zero is meaningful for ratio variables (zero token counts of parsimonious in a corpus signal an absence of that word in the corpus).
Such a corpus is sometimes referred to as a balanced corpus.
Some morphologists also consider these lists as a form of corpus, because they make it possible to gather large amounts of data.
However, unless we carefully search our corpus manually (a possibility I will return to below), there is typically a trade-off between the two.
Let us further limit the category to verbs first documented before the 19th century, in order to leave a clear diachronic gap between the established types and the productive types.
The primary clustering of the DECTE speakers therefore has a clear sociolinguistic interpretation based on educational level and employment type.
Let us assume you have generated a spreadsheet file <_qclwr2/_inputfiles/dat_dataframe-a.ods> or a tab-or comma-delimited file <_qclwr2/_ inputfiles/dat_dataframe-a.csv> containing the above data frame x (using a text editor or a spreadsheet software such as LibreOffice Calc).
Because the formatting and linking capabilities offered by HTML were not always sufficient for all needs in document handling, and SGML proved too unwieldy and error-prone, a new hypertext format, XML (eXtensible Markup Language) Version 1.0, was eventually created and released by the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) in 1998.
To demonstrate the kind of research called for, the second main section in this chapter (Section 3) presents a contrastive study of collocation and semantic prosody in English and Chinese, via a case study of a group of near synonyms denoting consequence in the two languages, which suggests that, in spite of some language-specific peculiarities, even genetically distant languages such as English and Chinese display similar collocational behavior and semantic prosody in their use of near synonyms.
We argue in this chapter that bootstrapping is underused in corpus linguistics, and that quantitative corpus linguists would do well to add this tool to their repertoire.
If you are writing your own computer scripts to build your corpus, you can integrate (or merge in) your metadata, bringing in all the metadata for each participant and all the metadata for each file for every token in the corpus.
I hope you can already foresee that we will use table a lot to generate frequency lists of corpora: once a corpus is stored in R such that every word is a vector element, using table is all it takes.
However, with the advent of electronic corpora, the speed and systematicity with which diachronic -like synchronic -records can be queried has increased tremendously, opening up new research possibilities by dramatically facilitating at least some aspects of data collection.
Transcription is often the bottleneck of corpus development.
Which past tense morpheme is likely to have higher realised, expanding, and potential productivity if you measured it in a corpus and why?
Topics discussed herecollocations, keywords and manual coding of concordance linesplay a key role both in the study of semantics ('dictionary' meanings of words) and in discourse analysis.
To narrow your search and make an analysis more manageable, you can choose a smaller number of texts to analyze or even create a smaller, virtual corpus.
Text A uses American spelling (defense), whereas text B sticks with the British spelling conventions (colour).
Corpus studies do not make it possible to draw this type of conclusion.
However, there are also diachronic or historical corpora, which contain texts from earlier periods of English.
There are many different types of searches that you can do with your corpus.
But the same can apply to written data -we might be interested in differences in how a word is used paragraph-initially versus medially or finally, for instance, and this can only be automated if the corpus has paragraph breaks marked up.
For example, it is possible to build a comparable corpus of parliamentary debates in France and the UK.
For example, it is possible to name files only by using a number, each representing a criterion used when compiling the corpus.
One of the most common error messages you'll probably encounter will be something like "XML Parsing Error: mismatched tag.
In the case of corpus studies, this is not a problem, however, since the files will not be read by humans, but processed by a concordancer.
For example, we shall see that middle-class female speakers aged 25 to 59 display a preference for the use of bloody in the British National Corpus (Sect.
Much of the interest in studying historical corpora began with the creation of the Helsinki Corpus, a 1.5 million-word corpus of English containing texts from the Old English period (beginning in the eighth century) through the early Modern English period (the first part of the eighteenth century).
Although it's of course somewhat easier to confine our corpus-based investigation to single lexical items, single words and their frequencies aren't the only interesting things we may want to analyse with the help of corpora.
On the other hand, though, this makes it possible for the basic text to be linked to various types of data-enriching annotations, as well as to perform more complex search operations, or to store intermediate or final results of such searches for different users and for quicker access or export later.
In corpora that do not include whole texts but only text samples (like the Brown family) it is therefore important to achieve a balance in terms of the different sections of texts represented.
There are several ways to store metadata for a corpus, but one popular way is to insert a chunk of descriptive information at the beginning of each corpus text in a fixed, specified format: this metadata chunk is called the header of the text.
There is yet another distinction that needs to be applied to the concept of word, since it is fundamental for corpus linguistics.
Both types represent borrowed forms that encode means, type 2 (o = 10, e = 0.8) with transitive verbal stems, type 3 with nominal stems (o = 3, e < 0.1).
The download and processing progress will be reported in the text window on the right, and a number of sub-folders will be created once the pages have been downloaded and processed successfully.
In cases like this, it may be advantageous to apply both methods and reject the null hypothesis only if both of them give the same result (and of course, our sample should be larger than ten cases).
This syntax is very powerful, allowing us to query the corpus for tokens or sequences of tokens at any level of annotation.
Representativeness or balancedness also plays a role if we do not aim at investigating a language as a whole, but are instead interested in a particular variety.
For instance, in planning the creation of the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English, it was decided that recordings of spontaneous conversations would include a wide range of speakers from around the United States representing, for instance, different regions of the country, ethnic groups, and genders.
This can be achieved via its 'content' property, which, in its most basic form, is simply a string of text enclosed in double quotes, so we can write turn[speaker=A]:before {content: "Agent:";} to make the word Agent followed by a colon appear before each turn produced by speaker A.
For instance, English-Norwegian Parallel Corpus was created for contrastive analysis.
In addition to information on collocation and frequency, a corpus will also allow us to examine the extent to which certain types of prescriptive rules are followed.
There are three types of additional information that can be added to a corpus, namely metadata, markup and annotation.
Descriptive metadata provides classificatory information derived from internal or external properties of the corpus components.
The probability value (alpha, or p) basically tells you how certain you can be that you are not committing a Type 1 error.
It is therefore important that we always ensure we understand how the text of a corpus is internally structured, and to critically relate these to our linguistic analyses and categories.
If the corpus has been created manually rather than through the use of a platform enabling automatic data download, a practical but important question concerns the number of files that should be created.
Other stages of building a corpus are also discussed, ranging from the administrative (how to keep records of texts that have been collected) to the practical, such as the various ways to transcribe recordings of speech.
It is for this reason that the approach that we will adopt in this book corresponds to a corpus-based approach, considering these as available tools for linguists to be able to test their hypotheses.
As an example of a pitfall related to text sampling, we discuss a particular usage of the complex adverb as well, which caught our attention some time ago.
But we want to add one little twist to the discussion: A vocabulary-growth curve is dependent -to some degree at least -on the exact order of the words in the corpus.
The assumption underlying basically all corpus-based analyses, however, is that formal differences reflect functional differences: Different frequencies of (co-)occurrences of formal elements are supposed to reflect functional regularities, where functional is understood here in a very broad sense as anything -be it semantic, discourse-pragmatic, etc.
To avoid copyright infringement, those using the BYU corpora (such as the Corpus of Contemporary American English) are only allowed to view "snippets" in search returns of grammatical items in the corpora they are studying.
One could collect only articles written by a single author, but this again might lead to a misrepresentation of the type of writing typically found in a genre.
A node is a word that we want to search for and analyse.
The last form of creating a subcorpus we'll discuss here is to use a 'Keyword/title scan'.
Delaere and De Sutter (2017), for example, rely on an English-to-Dutch parallel corpus to find out whether the English loanwords found in translated Dutch stem from their corresponding trigger words in the English source texts.
Looking at the words that exclusively occur in the general corpus, we can see some interesting types, namely concerning and regarding, that have been classified as prepositions despite the fact that they don't look like typical prepositions because they are in fact ing-forms, that is, they clearly still retain some verbal character.
CLAN offers the possibility of formulating queries on the CHILDES corpus for studying many aspects of children's language.
While intralinguistic information helps to understand internal issues and aspects of a text, extralinguistic information provides external information based on which we have a better insight and interpretation of a text.
A 'sample' is a subset of the population that we want to study.
As you'll have observed, the concordance output itself consists of the number of the hit, the name of the file it was found in -as a hyperlink -and the concordance result.
Taking into account important data related to each lemma's range (its frequency across academic disciplines) and dispersion, the researchers arrived at a new Academic Vocabulary List (AVL) of just over 3,000 words (the full list can be explored at www.wordandphrase.info/academic).
The study also confirms the variation between written and spoken texts, with textbooks containing twice as many different words as classroom teaching, despite their broadly similar instructional purposes, largely due to their use of specialized lexis.
There is no principled answer to the question "How large must a linguistic corpus be?
It is also important to be able to export annotations in a standardized format, based on the XML language, for example.
One monitor corpus that allows us to see changes in spoken corpora and also provides more current spoken data is COCA.
In other words, the researcher will go through the concordance and assign every instance of the orthographic string in question to one word-sense category posited in the corresponding lexical entry.
After a sample of digitized speech is loaded into the program, short segments of the sample can be automatically replayed until an accurate transcription is achieved.
The work produced by such researchers often aligns much more strongly with naturalism than corpus linguistics does.
Of course, some markup is probably better inserted after a text sample is computerized.
On the one hand, including information concerning paralinguistic features makes a corpus more authentic than it would be if this information was simply discarded.
The easiest option is to find an archive for the corpus, such as The Oxford Text Archive or CLARIN.
At best, a corpus can provide only a "snapshot" of language usage.
And both programs depend heavily on how accurately and completely sociolinguistic variables have been annotated, and whether the corpora being analyzed provide a representative sample of the variables.
If you look closely at the samples, you can see that in Sample A there are double dashes marking the parenthetical counterpart (i.e.
This is true regardless of whether we look at its token frequency in the corpus as a whole or under specific conditions; if its token frequency turned out to be higher under one condition than under the other, this would point to the association between that condition and one or more of the words containing the affix, rather than between the condition and the affix itself.
In the present context, we use this term to refer to a large digital collection of natural language texts that are assumed to be representative of a given language, dialect, or a subset of a language, to be used for linguistic annotation, processing, and analysis.
The current corpus (at time of writing) contains texts from 22,388,141 web pages from 94,391 websites.
The lemma MENTION has a very different distribution pattern from DECIDE, with mention that being proportionately more frequent than decide that.
How did its type/token ratio change in these two files, and what is the MLU in both files?
Note that even if we manage to solve the problem of reliability (as systematic elicitation from a representative sample of speakers does to some extent), the epistemological status of intuitive data remains completely unclear.
Moderately sized, second-generation, genre-balanced corpora, such as the 100-million-word British National Corpus 3.
We then passed from the concordance to close reading of the co-text around occurrences of Mubarak, a very common process in corpus-assisted discourse studies.
It should be immediately striking that there are many different behavioural profiles but also that there are not 851 distinct profiles, meaning there is consistency across the corpus in terms of not only the syntactic uses of run, but also the words it co-occurs with.
Development of a speech corpus involves issues and factors like purpose of use, selection of speakers, choice of settings, size of a corpus, use of recording instruments, manner of data sampling, manner of data elicitation, nature of transcription, types of data encoding, management of audio files, editing of input data, processing of spoken texts, annotation of speech, analysis of speech corpus, etc.
Next, they look at concordances of the remaining words to determine first, which senses are most frequent and thus most relevant for the observed differences, and second, whether the words are actually distributed across the respective corpus, discarding those 10 Text whose overall frequency is simply due to their frequent occurrence in a single file (since those words would not tell us anything about cultural differences).
In CFA, an intersection of variables whose observed frequency is significantly higher than expected is referred to as a type and one whose observed frequency is significantly lower is referred to as an antitype (but if we do not like this terminology, we do not have to use it and can keep talking about "more or less frequent than expected", as we do with bivariate 𝜒 2 tests).
It is a great baseline corpus for your own research as well.
Although the majority of examples presented in these case studies mimic the functionality of existing ready-built corpus tools, they will generally perform much faster because they are designed to carry out a specific task and they remove the overhead of creating and updating an interface.
Qualitative analysis of the interview corpus also supported findings from previous studies: women were more likely to claim to seek social support on the Internet, whereas men said that they use the Internet to look for information.
Using Python scripts as part of their analysis, the authors are able to quickly and accurately compare a range of possibilities for calculating keyness, including their own "text dispersion keyness" measure, which is not yet available in ready-built tools.
What would you do in the case of the Brown corpus?
The women contribute one sample each, while there are 33 speech samples from the male group.
When creating a spoken corpus, one also needs to think about whether an orthographic representation of the text will be sufficient, whether the corpus should be represented in phonetic transcription, or whether it should support annotation on various different levels (see Chapter 11).
This illustrates the first problem with the n-gram method, since even with a small text such as this, a large number of results is generated.
But most importantly, as discussed above, the issue of representativeness needs to be addressed before a corpus, regardless of size, can be considered appropriate for a given study.
For instance, fall, falling and fell occur always before the node love, while you occurs both before and after love with approximately the same frequency.
In corpus-based linguistics the research domain is some collection of natural language utterances.
Yet, their inclusion in the corpus does serve the community' s interest.
It is an interesting question to what extent such a citation database can be treated as a corpus (cf.
One lexically tagged and grammatically parsed corpus is ICE-GB, the British component of the International Corpus of English.
To some extent, these shortcomings are addressed by Gale's Digital Scholar Lab, 5 a text analytics platform through which the British Library Newspapers database can also be accessed.
For example, if the goal is to reach a sample of 200,000 words per text genre, this number of words can almost be instantly reached by including one or two entire books in the sample.
The preparation of samples to be included in the corpus poses two important methodological questions: on the one hand, the appropriate size for each sample, and, on the other hand, how to balance the portions of the corpus in such a way that the result is truly representative of the genre.
For instance, at 1.9 billion words in length, the Corpus of Global Web-Based English is so lengthy that it would be impossible to determine not just the content of the corpus but the distribution of such variables as the gender of contributors, their ages, and so forth.
The interpretation of a keyword or key tag list, done properly, is an onerous task, as it will typically involve undertaking at least a partial concordance or collocation analysis of a large part of the highest-scoring key items.
This has a number of methodological consequences concerning the practicability, the statistical evaluation and the epistemological status of collocation research.
Concordancers vary greatly in terms of what analyses, other than basic concordance searches, they allow.
However, this word will probably never be used in other texts in the corpus covering different fields, unlike words such as analysis, hypothesis or conclusion, which will probably be used in all scientific fields.
In less radical usage-based models of language, such as Langacker's, the corpus is not a model of linguistic competence -the latter is seen as a consequence of linguistic input perceived and organized by human minds with a particular structure (such as the capacity for figure-ground categorization).
It started life, however, as a corpus for lexicographic research which explains its great time-depth and wide coverage in terms of genres.
As a result, any web-derived corpus is likely to include documents that are either exact duplicates of one another or are very similar.
Part III of the book takes you through the steps of building a corpus (Chapter 5) and then covers some statistical procedures that can be used when interpreting data (Chapters 6 and 7).
Essentially, a concordance is a listing of individual word forms in a given specific context, where the exact nature of the context depends on the requirements of the analysis and which particular program one may be using.
In this sense, corpus stylistics requires engagement with concepts that address properties and interpretations of literary texts.
In terms of quantity, for example, the use of corpus-derived collocation boxes needs to be systematized.
In the British component of the International Corpus of English (ICE-GB), ethnographic information on speakers and writers is stored in a database, and a text analysis program designed to analyze the corpus, ICECUP (the International Corpus of English Corpus Utility Program) can draw upon information in this database to search by, for instance, age or gender.
In other words, while the number of types and the number of hapaxes generally increase as the number of tokens in a sample increases, they do not increase at a steady rate.
When we ask about word types we are asking about how many different word forms there are in the text/corpus.
It has been a decade since the book Corpus Linguistics 25 Years on (Facchinetti 2007) was published.
WordSmith, AntConc) run from the researcher's desktop computer; this means that the user can analyse any corpus they have available locally using these programs.
All we have to do to achieve this is first to declare them as inline elements and then write the appropriate content definitions, where we use the same text as in the actual elements, but get their relevant attribute values using the attr() syntax we used previously for retrieving the turn numbers.
Similarly, a speaker annotation ('sp_who') is attached to both tokens, as is the sentence annotation, but it is conceivable that these may conflict hierarchically: a single sentence annotation may theoretically cover tokens belonging to different speakers, which may or may not be desirable (e.g.
However, there is a potential problem that we need to take into account: the values of the variables Sex and 6.6 Complex research designs Age and their intersections are not necessarily distributed evenly in the subpart of the BNC used here; although the makers of the corpus were careful to include a broad range of speakers of all ages, sexes (and class memberships, ignored in our study), they did not attempt to balance all these demographic variables, let alone their intersections.
What does one do, then, to ensure that the spoken part of a corpus contains a balance of different dialects?
You can see from these examples that 'text' in this sense is broader than a document or what you produce when typing in a text editor.
It is worthwhile to explore various tools whether you are new to corpus linguistics or are a seasoned veteran.
The effect of Corpus Time in the lower right panel is quite wiggly, but as we are dealing with a predictor with 27062 distinct values, and as we have no apriori hypothesis about how deviation probabilities might change in the course of the interview, we accept the smooth as providing a description of real changes over time in diphone deviation behavior.
Are the texts in a file format that will allow for analysis by the corpus software you will use in your analysis?
However, in some specific cases, a corpus can include the whole population.
Just like Firefox, it also breaks longer paragraphs into shorter lines, thus adding extra line breaks that do not form part of the original text.
Balanced corpora like Brown are of most value to individuals whose interests are primarily linguistic and who want to use a corpus for purposes of linguistic description and analysis.
This approach provides a comprehensive linguistic picture of the text under consideration and allows for a functional interpretation of the relevant linguistic features.
It is important for corpus users to be aware of such potential differences in the orthographic transcriptions as they may lead to the missing of tokens in a word-based corpus search: in a search for 'because', for instance, transcribed forms such as 'coz' and 'cos' will not be found.
A higher z-score indicates a greater degree of collocability of an item with the node word.
This parameter performs two functions: as the significance criterion (and therefore it should not be changed without a very good reason, since it strikes a balance between Type I and Type II errors), and a hyperparameter (i.e.
I also provide supplementary online material, including information about the corpora and corpus queries used as well as, in many cases, the full data sets on which the case studies are based.
The processes of corpus sanitation start when a corpus is made ready for use.
However, since this is an important issue, I would like to encourage you to not only get more familiar with this kind of encoding, but also do Exercise box 3.8 now.
In other words, following the principles of Open Corpus Linguistics requires us to invest considerable time in Research Data Management (RDM).
In Section 4 I summarise the main findings and discuss their implications to the corpus linguistic study of historical newspaper discourse.
That being done, bilingual concordancers search directly for the occurrences of a word in one of the two languages of the corpus, and simultaneously extract the matching sentence in the other language.
Yet, even well documented spoken corpora are often not immediately (re-)usable to the wider research community, especially if the intended linguistic use is not the original one of the corpus compilers.
Then we group the frequencies by the lemmas with tapply and sum up all frequencies of each lemma (we don't do the insertion into a long vector with counter here because, since we're only looking at BNC folder A, the data set is small enough for this to work even on a computer that's not state-of-the-art).
Future advances in historical corpus linguistics are likely to have theoretical as well as practical effects on how scholars use registers.
More recently, however, the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) has developed a standardized system of annotation not just for linguistic corpora (www.tei-c.org/release/doc/ tei-p5-doc/en/html/CC.html) but for electronic texts in general (www .tei-c.org/).
This search can be greatly simplified if the corpus has been annotated by determining, for each word, its grammatical category.
Originally, the Silverstein Hierarchy was meant to allow for a principled description of split ergative systems; it is possible, that the specific conflation of variables is suitable 4 Data retrieval and annotation for this task.
Biber is not the only linguist to observe this (Halliday does this in a more theoretically-informed way, and Matthiessen, as noted, has added statistical rigour to that model), but Biber has carried out more extensive investigations of this type than anyone else.
For example, if frequency counts are derived from a large representative corpus such as the British National Corpus (BNC), we may reasonably claim that high frequency words in the corpus may also have a similarly high usage in the language.
From the point of view of functional words, texts intended for children in the corpus mainly refer to the question of space, whereas the texts intended for adults focus primarily on the temporal dimension.
It is a difficult question, and my aim in this chapter is to discuss it and review the state of historical pragmatic research using corpus-linguistic methods.
Moon's analysis is particularly enlightening in that it offers a diachronic perspective to current lexicographic practice and places emphasis on "the function of phraseological information in relation to the needs and interests of the target users" (2008b: 333).
Six additional tokens in the 1980s sample were produced by an author from Portland, Oregon, and one from Seattle, Washington, which raised strong suspicion of Canadian influence.
The problem of manual tracking and counting of occurrences is all the more acute since corpus linguistics is often based on large amounts of data which have not been drawn from a single book, in view of observing the multiple occurrences of a certain linguistic phenomenon and thus apprehending its specificities.
The data provided by these contrastive corpus-based studies are not only useful in theoretical linguistics for understanding how languages work, but may be helpful for other applications, notably for the development of tools such as bilingual dictionaries (see section 4.6).
The Helsinki Corpus, which was to be published in 1991, would revolutionize the historical research of English for decades to come, and its importance for historical corpus linguistics cannot be overstated.
The first step in the process is to supply a list of 'seed' words from which the corpus will be grown by the software.
Frequency lists can also be compiled for any annotation that is present in the corpus, and we can talk about types and tokens of annotation tags in the same way.
But for others in the field, the insights into language that arise from the use of the corpus are so radically different from the traditional understanding of how language works that they consider corpus linguistics to constitute an independent field of study or theory of language.
One is concerned with the fact that words can theoretically have identical type and token frequencies, but may still be very differently distributed.
This is because what it would in fact generally match is the very first occurrence of the character sequence, followed by the rest of the text, that is, a combination of word characters, whitespaces, punctuation marks, etc., until we reach the end of the text itself, which is -perhaps not so obviously -also a kind of word boundary.
Download the files and make sure they are saved in text format (see the website referenced above on how to do that).
Finally, a recent trend in corpus-based research of World Englishes is the detailed statistical modeling of variation, often including ENL, ESL, and EFL varieties.
Using a relatively inexpensive piece of software called a concordancing program, the lexicographer can go through the stages of dictionary production described above, and instead of spending hours and weeks obtaining information on words, can obtain this information automatically from a computerized corpus.
As is noted in the chapter, collecting and transcribing spoken language is one of the more labor-intensive parts of creating a corpus.
In order to decide which language is most suitable for a particular corpus linguistics programming task, there are at least four important factors to consider at the outset.
This would seem to be corroborated by the fact that among is somewhat underrepresented in the general corpus (ratio 0.712), which, however, exclusively has the alternative, and more formal form, amongst instead, as well as the relatively high level of occurrences of within (ratio 2.727) as an alternative to the less formal in.
As we've already seen above, there are quite a few cases where we may have difficulty in assigning multiple words to one single type, but it isn't only for multi-word units that we encounter such problems.
Relying on the Dutch Parallel Corpus, the authors combine two approaches in their study: monolingual comparable (Dutch translated from English and French, alongside original Dutch) and parallel (English to Dutch).
Studies are needed that do not just analyze text corpora but which involve the authors or the readers of the texts in the analysis by also collecting interview data.
Concgrams are repeated sequences of words that may be discontinuous and in any order, and this allows the user to find possibly interesting phraseological patterns in text which contain optional intervening items.
Therefore, the time saved in using second-party transcripts is worth the tolerance of a certain level of error, provided that some checking is done to ensure overall accuracy in the transcripts included in a corpus.
This is not true of all Web 2.0 texts though, and corpus linguists have had to devise new methods to access the language of social media sites.
Without knowledge and practice using a specific framework, we have found that students can be quite enamored with the "button-pushing" aspects of corpus linguistics at the expense of interpreting the results of their searches.
In order to illustrate some of the concepts in doing a situational and linguistic analysis along with a functional interpretation, we will refer to a small corpus of English as Second-Language writers who were asked to produce problem-solution paragraphs in two different conditions.
As such, the "mystery of vanishing reliability" can be reframed in terms of a lack of extensibility: Being in control over the compilation of a corpus allows us to easily extend the database if necessary.
The first step of annotation is called the structural markup, which gives descriptive information about the text; thus, structural markup is used to create the text's metadata.
For each spoken text, a record was kept of when the text was recorded, where the recording took place, who was recorded, who did the recording, and how long the recording was.
While the purpose of the analysis of texts may vary between corpus linguistics and studies interested in style, the methods, however, can still be similar.
This, however, means that another desideratum of corpus composition must be considered, viz.
Moreover, manuscripts can be illegible in sections, requiring the corpus creator to reconstruct what the writer might have written.
The list of tags used for a corpus is presented on the site.
They point out that this sentence will not occur in any given finite corpus, but that this does not allow us to declare it ungrammatical, since it could simply be one of infinitely many sentences that "simply haven't occurred yet".
The single node in the layer 'sentence types' above the tokens is annotated as s_type = decl (declarative sentence), and is attached to both tokens, but the edges attaching it are unannotated (no labels).
Therefore, maybe simply inserting your codes in round brackets may look too much like regular text to be really useful, and even replacing the round ones by other types of brackets may be problematic, for instance, if you happen to be analysing a linguistics text where different types of brackets are used to indicate different levels of analysis, such as, for example, curly brackets to enclose morphemes, or square ones to mark phonetic representation.
Several corpus techniques, for example, keyword and key-cluster tools, have the specific aim of facilitating comparison.
They finished and released their corpus, the Brown Corpus of edited written English "for use with digital computers," in 1964, before Quirk (concentrating on detailed spoken transcription) had completed as much as a quarter of his.
We'll use this later on to see how we can extract text from a PDF file.
More specifically, should we create a single file for the whole corpus?
These are sometimes good reasons for eliciting a special-purpose corpus rather than collecting naturally occurring text.
Often, the next kind of information the reader needs to learn about is some descriptive statistics of the data of the type discussed in Chap.
However, if you persist, I can promise you that soon you'll not only be able to understand the value of regexes for achieving even highly complex tasks in linguistic analysis very efficiently, but will also learn to hone your analysis skills related to morphology and morpho-syntax, something you'll definitely be able to profit from in your work in corpus linguistics, as these two areas often form the basis for further linguistic analyses.
The corpus labeling process can be carried out manually by the same user or allow access to the platform to a set of annotators and to supervise their work.
Achieving gender balance in a corpus involves more than simply ensuring that half the speakers and writers in a corpus are female and half male.
If the assumption of independence does not hold, standard errors for model coefficients will typically be estimated as smaller than they nominally are, leading to increased Type I error rates in inferences about the coefficients.
There are still some artifacts of corpus construction: the codes F and J are used in BROWN to indicate that letter combinations and formulae have been removed.
Metadata is literally 'data about data' .
A further feature desirable from a scientific point of view may be modifiability or manipulability, that is, we may want to offer the opportunity to add further texts to the corpus as appropriate in given research contexts or to modify the corpus composition in other ways (e.g.
Finally, the chosen corpus should include productions made by adult native speakers.
Type 6 (o = 6, e = 0.3) in the third period is to be seen as a short-lived fad, namely the use of native adjectival stems to construct forms such as funniment or dreariment.
Data for Question #1 in Section 6.4.2 2 We must be careful as to how we select them in the corpus, though -and the best way to do so is to get a set of randomly selected relative clause sentences and continue our classification based on that.
In addition, ICE uses two more tags relevant to the present discussion: <foreign> (for a "word or sequence of words that is foreign and non-naturalised") and <indig> (marking words which are "non-English but are indigenous to the country in which the corpus is being compiled").
This decision is important because it will determine exactly what the corpus will look like: what types of texts will be included in it (e.g.
Suffice it to say that the characteristics of a corpus may be more or less appropriate for answering a research question.
Given these multiple indicators, in this situation in which large differences exist between the effect sizes of the studies included in the meta-analysis, the mean of the effect sizes from all studies obscure patterns in the sample.
Each piece of text (either spoken or written) contains a few rhetorics-either explicitly visible or implicitly embedded.
The more limited the topic contained in the corpus, the easier it'll become to identify the latter.
However, since an item like at first has a frequency of over 5,000 in the corpus, line-by-line searching was not a viable option.
We do not share views here (occasionally uttered in corpus linguistics literature) that findings from any given corpus merely apply to this corpus and nothing beyond.
In particular, these questions will determine the type of interactions that should be recorded, the constraints regarding the context as well as the information contained in the transcript.
For example, one current issue for the study of phraseology in corpus linguistics concerns the best methods to be used for the identification of the most important lexical phrases in a corpus.
In Chapter 5, we will discuss in more depth the data that are available in French to the public for carrying out corpus studies.
A general corpus comprises texts represented by various types, including written or spoken language.
Specialised corpus software and web interfaces also have means of finding examples and often have ways to save those examples to a new document or spreadsheet for further analysis.
The difficult point to assemble this corpus relates to the way of balancing its content between different literary genres.
Should you choose to do a slide show presentation, try not to put too much text on your slides.
However, especially at the beginning, it is probably wise to try to strike a balance between minimizing typing on the one hand and maximizing transparency of the code on the other.
Let me finally very briefly mention the package xml2, which is useful to avoid the XML package's memory leak on Windows.
In corpora, this assumption is usually violated to some extent due to the nature of language, where linguistic features are interconnected, and also due to corpus sampling that is done at the level of texts, not individual linguistic features.
However, corpus linguists have actually uncovered a number of relationships between words and linguistic phenomena beyond lexicon and grammar without making use of such annotations.
Software libraries are available in several programming languages to help with this, including the Text::DeDuper module in Perl.
Thus, we must formulate one or more queries that will retrieve all (or a representative sample of) cases of the phenomenon under investigation.
CHILDES and the CHAT format as well as widespread markup languages such as XML have made a great contribution to unification but still leave room for enormous variation, even in areas that are of great interest to many researchers such as word meaning, morphology, or syntax.
Word processing software often include this feature, simply by choosing the "text format" option from the "save as" command.
For instance, word-class tagging has become much more accurate.
This is an example of an innovative study using the corpus-based method to gain new insights into the linguistic subdiscipline of pragmatics.
Part III, then, is organized in terms of the range of varieties that have been studied from a corpus perspective.
XML describes content (like SGML), rather than layout (like HTML), so that the exact rendering of a document needs to be specified via a style sheet because otherwise the browser/application displaying it wouldn't know how to achieve its task.
And there is some evidence to suggest that this is the appropriate approach to take in creating a corpus.
We will begin by looking at epistemology, arguing that this is a major driver of corpus linguistics' integration with, or separation from, the social sciences.
Given how frequently we have compared British and American English in this book, these two varieties may seem an obvious place to start, but the two cultures may be too similar, and the word happiness happens to be too infrequent in the BROWN corpus anyway.
While most of the recordings for a corpus will be obtained by recording individuals with microphones, many corpora will contain sections of broadcast speech.
The accuracy rates reported above give some sense of what is possible with stateof-the-art automatic annotation.
First, note that Sinclair's approach is quantitative only in a very informal sense -he rarely reports exact frequencies for a given semantic feature in his sample, relying instead on general statements about the frequency or rarity of particular phenomena.
One area that reflects this complexity and that has efficiently adapted social media is Corpus Linguistics (CL).
The same applies to sorting the data by frequency if we wanted to compare raw frequencies for whatever reason, or simply identify non-occurring types in either corpus.
The corpus can be queried online.
In order to analyze gender variation in this corpus, the gender of the author of each letter was predicted based on their first name, as listed in the byline of the letter.
Simply stating that the occurs forty times per thousand words in a corpus tells us nothing of linguistic interest, whether about the word the or about the corpus in question.
Likewise, we also consider how social science theory is exerting influence on studies in corpus linguistics.
We can convert it into something called the sample standard deviation, however, by taking its square root.
Providing this type of social background information of course poses new challenges, requiring a thorough knowledge of the social structure of past societies.
As many of the techniques we'll be dealing with here also allow us to investigate issues of style in both literary and non-literary text, and much of the data we'll initially use actually consists of fictional works because these are easier to obtain and often don't cause any copyright as that of morphology, or even phonology.
The MPC fits this criterion, as the kinds of language samples to be included in the corpus were carefully planned prior to the collection of data.
The best way to achieve this is to draw a complete sample of the phenomenon in question, i.e.
Also possible is compiling the corpus in multiple formats.
Even though the authors allow researchers to use the text in their corpus, some of the owners of the writing texts may not allow researchers to share the corpus with other researchers worldwide.
As we saw in (6.1), individual passages in the text refer to passages in the recording through time code information that allows users to navigate across the two files.
Third, a range of other interesting statistics can help corpus linguistics tackle other statistical challenges.
Concordancers generally make it possible to export the data retrieved in text format.
Until relatively recently, corpus-based studies have tended to focus almost exclusively on the English language, and on British and American English in particular.
Adding this perspective to our definition, we get the following: Definition (Fourth attempt, linguistic interpretation) Corpus linguistics is the investigation of linguistic research questions based on the complete and systematic analysis of the distribution of linguistic phenomena in a linguistic corpus.
It can also be done by writing a report solely dedicated to describing the corpus (and possibly how to use it), which is made available either as a separate file stored together with the corpus itself, or online.
On the one hand, these kinds of studies are relatively easy to carry out without the necessary background knowledge for a more sophisticated type of study.
This annotation is useful since a pronoun like he is not an autonomous referential expression, meaning that it does not by itself make it possible to identify the referent in question if we ignore the context.
We sample Obama's speech and many others that are also representative of the language population we are interested in.
Undergrads in my corpus classes without prior programming experience have quickly learned to write small programs that do things better than many concordance software, and you can do the same.
For instance, many ready-made corpus tools can only offer the functionality they aim to provide for corpora with particular formats, and then can only provide a small number of kinds of output.
Frequency lists, usually of words, provide a list of all the items in the corpus and a count of how often they occur and in some cases how widely dispersed the items are across multiple sections of a corpus.
In particular, we can expect an increase in accuracy for certain corpus tools, such as improvement in the accuracy of software used to parse and lexically tag corpora, and the increased accuracy of tools, such as concordancing programs, used to retrieve constructions from corpora.
For instance, below is a sample list of examples of Trump's use of the word loser(s).
We do this to understand discourse and pragmatic strategies deployed in a text.
Metadata can be more or less detailed, and some details are easier to determine than others.
The underlying theoretical idea of corpus linguistics is quite broad.
These are reasonable arguments, but if possible, it seems a good idea to complement any analysis done with Google Books with an analysis of a more rigorously constructed balanced corpus.
Go to COCA, hit "Browse" and type in say in the word box.
This, however, needs to be complemented with a careful description of the corpus of interest C in the Data subsection of the Method section.
This annotation has sentence structures represented in a tree-like structure showing hierarchical dependencies, which is useful for testing assumptions of some theories of grammar.
This type of glosses is also common in general linguistic publications and specifies both the shape and function of all morphemes.
These can be extracted relatively straightforwardly even from an untagged corpus using the following queries: The query in (12a) will find all finite forms of the verb be (as non-finite forms cannot occur in tag questions), followed by the negative clitic n't, followed by a pronoun; the query in (12b) will do the same thing for the full form of the particle not, which then follows rather than precedes the pronoun.
Furthermore, as real corpus linguistics is not just about getting some 'impressive' numbers but should in fact allow you to gain real insights into different aspects of language, you should always try to relate your results to what you know from established theories and other methods used in linguistics, or even other related disciplines, such as for example sociology, psychology, etc., as far as they may be relevant to answering your research questions.
In general, their positions on genre could be described to as defined by their relationship to the text as an object.
This corpus contains texts representing three periods in the development of English: Old English (850-1150), Middle English (1150-1500), and Early Modern English (1500-1710).
Brown corpus) whereas the alternative is to aim for a balance of text varieties (cf.
Inexperienced writers most frequently produce text messages with opening and closing expressions.
This is a fairly accurate definition, in the sense that it describes the actual practice of a large body of corpus-linguistic research in a way that distinguishes it from similar kinds of research.
After deciding on the research question(s), the researcher should test the corpus to determine whether it can answer particular research questions.
It also offers a starting point for corpus-driven investigations of academic corpora by generating list of items which can be further explored in more detail using concordance analyses.
In the case of audiovisual recordings, a larger share of contextual information will be captured and should not be explicitly added to the corpus (although some kind of codification may later be required to perform specific analyses).
The arrival of these tools has greatly accelerated research in corpus linguistics.
As part of the corpus linguist's toolbox, the keywords method is most appropriate as a starting point to assist in the filtering of items for further investigations, rather than an end in and of itself.
The Nadig corpus also includes 28 French-speaking children diagnosed with ASD, aged between 3 and 7 years.
If an XML document conforms with one of these two types of specification, we talk of a valid document.
The type/token ratio cannot therefore be considered as a reliable measure of linguistic development.
In reality, this is difficult to achieve and may in fact be undesirable, since we might, for example, want our corpus (or sample) to reflect the real-world correlation of speaker variables).
The frequencies of POS categoriesboth major categories such as pronouns and subcategories like personal or indefinite pronouns -were compared in two similar-sized corpora, a corpus of native novice writing, LOCNESS, and the French component of ICLE.
In terms of attributes, you should be able to find 27, where 'n' represents numerical identifiers for all the 14 textual elements, 'pos' the 12 PoS categories for the words, and 'type' which type of punctuation is present at the end of the syntactic unit.
For instance, one corpus may contain samples of written texts, the other one may contain samples of spoken texts, and the third one may contain transcripted spoken texts.
An area of constant exploration is the role that a technical expertise in language structure -lexis, grammar, discourse -plays in relation to expertise in quantification.
Against this background, it is interesting to note that Rissanen felt compelled to discuss some potential pitfalls related to historical corpus linguistics two years prior to the publication of the Helsinki Corpus.
For reasons of space, we won't look at further examples of other types of annotation here now, but will later work more extensively on a sample that combines some of the different levels.
If a written text is planned to be used in a corpus, researchers should take the required permissions from the author of the text, which will prevent copyright issues that might be faced in the future.
Moving beyond the sample, 95% confidence intervals can be calculated.
It requires considerable resources to create balanced corpora, such as the BNC, whereas COCA contains texts downloaded from websites, requiring much less effort than building a corpus such as the BNC.
A first technique involves choosing the samples completely at random, the idea being that out of the total number of samples in the corpus, the most frequent characteristics will eventually stand out on their own.
In corpus linguistics (and the social sciences more generally), hypotheses of this type are the exception rather than the norm -we are more likely to deal with statements about tendencies (think Most swans are white or Most examples of windscreen are British English), where the search for counterexamples is not a viable research strategy.
However, by type frequency, bimorphemic and 3-morpheme word types are most frequent.
Then, the researcher should transfer the results obtained through the concordance programs to statistical software programs such as Excel or SPSS.
This corpus established a methodology for corpus creation and analysis that has continued until the present.
The following is the standard glm() call to estimate a model with the measure lemma (150 levels) as a fixed effect.
We can use higher statistical power to reduce the probability of a Type-2 error, i.e.
The replication crisis in linguistics is highly relevant to corpus-based research: Many corpus studies are not directly replicable as the data on which they are based are not readily available.
Frequency-based collocates are therefore fairly generic (we can expect a similar set of collocates for almost any node) and have only a limited usefulness.
In practice, some corpus tools let us set the minimum cut-off limits for the frequencies of words in C and R before considering them in the keyword procedure.
A good example is the Corpus of Early English Correspondence, already discussed above.
The particular flavour we'll want to use for this course is a variable byte encoding called UTF-8, which stores characters in up to six bytes, but generally has the advantage that the basic Latin characters appear at exactly the same positions as in the simple encoding discussed above, so that opening an English text in UTF-8 would essentially be the same as opening it in ASCII or Latin1.
But as much research in corpus linguistics has demonstrated, empirical data can both enhance and support the claims made in linguistic analyses.
It does not influence the close-reading method in a meaningful way and does not indicate information that could tie the text(s) to a broader intellectual context.
Although it is quite easy to determine the relative importance of spontaneous dialogues in English, it is far more difficult to go through every potential genre to be included in a corpus and rank its relative importance and frequency to determine how much of the genre should be included in the corpus.
The most useful output format in many areas of corpus linguistics for such a list is generally to have a list that is first sorted according to the frequency in descending order, that is, with the most common words occurring first, and then 'alphabetically' if the same number of tokens occurs for more than one type.
Compared to a specialized corpus, a general corpus is usually much larger.
This signifies a very uneven distribution in the 15 corpus genres.
The OCR confidence value corresponding to each text can be conveniently accessed with Octavo, like any other metadata.
Digital corpus is now a known thing to us and we have come to a common agreement to understand what counts as a 'corpus', what are its characteristics, how it can be built and classified, how it can be annotated and processed, and how it can be analyzed and utilized.
It involves diverse activities like storage, metadata generation, archiving, augmentation, upgradation, processing, retrieval, dissemination, and other works.
Thus, having chosen to sample such things as popular novels, or technical writing, best-seller lists and library circulation statistics were consulted to select particular examples of them.
From these questions, it may be clear that it's by no means obvious -or at least should not lightly be considered obvious -what the real unit in text could be.
And even for the negated version of the word smoker, which may at first glance seem to be quite uncontroversial, we find the three variants non smoker (3x in 1 text), un-hyphenated nonsmoker (7x in 4 texts) and -most frequentlynon-smoker (55 in 36 texts).
As Transana is primarily a tool for qualitative analysis, its provisions for, for example, frequency-based or numerical analysis (as utilized by corpus linguists) is somewhat limited.
Once a corpus is built and stored in an archive, we need robust schemes for regular maintenance, upgradation, and augmentation of the resource.
The statistical significance of a correlation is directly related to the number of observations (cases).
They may, however, inform corpus-based syntactic argumentation (cf.
More interesting is the fact that would is a keyword for the Liberal Democrats; this is because their manifesto 10.2 Case studies 10 Text mentions hypothetical events more frequently, which Rayson takes to mean that they did not expect to win the election.
We'll see some examples and different ways for applying markup to text later on, but for now, we're more interested in the reasons that exist for applying markup to our data in the first place, and roughly which different types of linguistic annotation currently exist.
Excluding such data from corpus linguistics will in a sense also deprive us of the possibility to thoroughly evaluate structures vis-à-vis certain production conditions, for example, the production of elicited texts not based on established routines.
The following sections describe the three different ways of describing the content of a corpus, beginning with a brief overview of Metadata and more detailed descriptions of Textual Markup and Linguistic Annotation.
For example, it should specify the manner in which the corpus has been segmented into words, sentences, utterances or discourse segments.
A rhetorically developed text differs in choice of words, order of words, sentence structure, grammatical form, sense implication, and reference.
Those who are reasonably computer literate and whose corpus needs are relatively simple are likely to be able to do all the formatting themselves.
Often a concordance display gives information about the word by putting that word in the middle of a line with a certain amount of words preceding and following it.
First, because texts to be included in a corpus will be edited with some kind of text editing program, it may be tempting to save computerized texts in a file format used by a word processing program (such as files with the extension .doc in Microsoft Word).
This observation is confirmed in a larger corpus.
Part of this information about the corpus is a citation so that it can be referenced, as we do in this book.
For instance, the 14 billion-word iWeb Corpus consists entirely of texts taken from websites.
Instead, the aim is to provide an overview of the main approaches to the problem and a discussion of the methods that are most often used and / or seem to the author to be most intuitively accessible and effective for corpus linguists.
Because the sentences included in the corpus were taken from news stories, the sentences did occur in a natural communicative setting.
A select overview of research conducted on this corpus makes this point very clear.
A corpus is considered balanced if its subsections are correctly sized relative to one another.
The tagging of some of the most well-known named entities in the BNCweb and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA; Davies 2008-; which both use the CLAWS tagger), such as the White House (the official residence of the president of the United States), seems to take account of the use of capital initials, and mostly White in that name is tagged as a proper noun (_np or _NP0).
While such an "individual-document approach" (McEnery & Hardie 2011: 232) might indeed be appropriate for some purposes, corpus linguists would usually be interested in looking at a concordance to identify patterns in the use of the search term or calculate and compare its normalised frequency across different sections of the database.
Section 3 focuses on some pitfalls related to big corpora, and our examples in this section concern both the reliability of the semi-automated sampling of such resources and the comparability of the research results when new genres are introduced to the corpus.
Annotation of semantic categorisation is useful, for example, for various investigations of text content.
For annotations of a specific linguistic phenomenon (in the situation presented at the end of section 7.2), one solution would be to retrieve the relevant data from the corpus, and then to annotate them separately.
They can equally well apply to tags within a corpus, if any levels of annotation have been applied.
Several web for corpus projects (e.g.
Any given type will be more frequent in a bigger corpus; for that reason, corpus frequencies are often given in relative terms, as frequencies per thousand words or per million words.
This collection of papers focuses on questions of standards for the construction, annotation, searching, archiving and sharing of spoken corpora used in conversation analysis, sociolinguistics, discourse analysis and pragmatics.
Much work in corpus linguistics has oriented itself towards real world problems, including in areas such as climate change research (e.g.
If you don't have such skills (yet), perhaps the best solution is to continue doing corpus-based studies.
Sections 2.1 and 2.2 contrast studies based on their major methodological approaches, distinguishing between corpus-based studies of pre-selected lexical expressions versus corpus-driven studies to identify the full set of important multi-word sequences in a corpus.
Above, we mostly looked at retrieving the data values of our XML data, but of course we want to also use the often detailed annotation that is within the tags.
However, retrieving text from digital formats may have varying degrees of difficulty depending on the original format; for example, it can be very difficult to isolate the texts of different articles in a journal page formatted as a PDF document, or even impossible when the PDF file includes text images.
These later become visible when a file is opened with an editor in pure text format.
Single quotes ('…') signal that an expression is being used in an unusual or unconventional way, that we're referring to the meaning of a word or construction on the semantic level, or to refer to menu items or sometimes button text in programs used.
The main one is probably that, in addition text-processing capabilities, R offers a large number of ready-made functions for the statistical evaluation and graphical representation of data, which allows you to perform just about all corpus-linguistic tasks within only one programming environment.
A large corpus does not guarantee a balanced representation of all varieties of texts of a language, if not desired so.
Make sure to support your analysis with examples from the corpus.
Given how labour-intensive manual data annotation is, it is difficult to meet the growing need to annotate larger samples for robust statistical research.
Throughout the nineteenth and much of the twentieth centuries corpus linguistics was exclusively paper-based.
For example, to be able to compare the language of women and that of men, this variable must be clearly identifiable in the metadata of a corpus.
Each corpus consists of four major written genres (general prose, fiction, newspapers and academic writing).
Therefore, rather than focussing on the quantity of data in a corpus, it is always sensible to emphasize varieties of data.
Additional important layers of annotation are translation, morphological glosses where software such as ELAN can be useful (cf.
To prevent this, the ICE Project has special markup that encloses the entire sequence of repetitions (<}_><}/_>) and then places special markup (<=_>the police boat<=/>) around the last instance of the repetition, the only instance counted in analyses done by ICECUP, the text analysis program used in the ICE Project.
Corpus linguists deal with a small fraction of all texts that have been produced in a language, so any corpus is always only a small sample drawn from the real-world population of texts (cf.
That could be achieved using something like (matchposition-3):(matchposition+3) -but what if the match is the first or second word in the corpus, or the penultimate or the last, meaning the subtraction and addition of 3 will result in nonsensical position values?
However, a text that does use the word elephant once is then rather likely to go on and use it several more times (for example, if it is a text about elephants).
Or do we want a fully-fledged spoken corpus that will never be published in any general written form?
You can use a chi-squared test if you have a random sample from the population of interest, these observations are independent, you have a minimum of five observations, and observations fall into clear categories (these are the assumptions of the chi-squared test that need to be met; the minimum requirement of 5+ observations is a rule of thumb for robustness sake).
As long as transcriptions contain clearly identified speakers and speaker turns, and appropriate annotation to mark the various features of speech, a transcription will be perfectly usable.
To mention a few concrete examples, WordSmith Tools offers a dispersion plot as well as range and Juilland's D-values (without explicitly stating that that is in fact the statistic that is provided) while AntConc offers a version of a dispersion plot separately for each file of a corpus, which is often not what one needs.
These scaled values can then be compared between text lengths like normalized frequencies would be, such as by visual exploration of graphs or by using some further statistical or computational analysis.
So, for example, in the British National Corpus, sequences such as of course, all at once, and from now on are tagged as adverbs, while instead of, in pursuit of, and in accordance with are tagged as prepositions.
Likewise, a text produced by a learner is also natural, insofar as it is produced in its usual conditions, without there having been any particular manipulation.
For the latter, you could opt for only investigating the speech of men or women, or speakers from the same or different social classes, or create subcorpora for both, and then compare the language in some way, which makes it possible to carry out corpus-based sociolinguistic analyses on the data, as do the options for restricting speakers to particular education levels, etc.
For many languages there are no tagged corpora available, so to find grammatical phenomena, corpus linguists may have to rely on string searchers.
For instance paragraph boundaries might be shown in XML using <p> tags; a <title> tag in the header might contain the original title of a text; and a POS tag on a word could be represented as <w pos='NN1'> (where NN1 is a common tag for a singular common noun).
If encoding does not match, you will potentially not find relevant text.
A vital part of your corpus project is, obviously, the corpus itself!
In the rest of this section, we will focus on a detailed annotation of specific elements in the corpus.
Given the considerable interest in utilizing the corpus linguistic approach, in addition to the dynamic and interdisciplinary nature of current studies involving partnerships among disciplines, a comprehensive and systematic overview of the development of and relationships among individual research in the fields of corpus linguistics is called for.
While subject-area specialists may no doubt suggest that other, higher-impact journals belong in this corpus, the goal of this study was not to produce "the " "definitive " applied linguistics research article corpus and word list.
After the loop, we will again use exact.matches.2 to retrieve the tags from the matches, we will use gsub to retrieve the forms only (i.e., discard all annotation), and we will use substr to define the lemma of each match (by retrieving the first letter, which gives us enough information to distinguish run and walk) and using ifelse to define a lemma column).
In addition to keeping records of the texts that are recorded, it is equally important to obtain ethnographic information from individuals contributing either a sample of speech or a written text.
As we have moved towards the 'web for corpus' approach, a new challenge has emerged concerning the legality of distributing corpora crawled from the web.
This type of information is included in the "headers" of the text but will not be read by the concordance software.
In Chapter 3, we will show you how to search an existing corpus for the linguistic variables you may be interested in (whether lexical or grammatical), and in Chapter 4, we will take you through several projects that will help you learn how to do studies of this kind.
This is already an interesting finding given how widespread the consensus among corpus linguists is that tree-based approaches are good at detecting interactions: in this case, all approaches return a three-way interaction when a two-way interaction is all that would be required/desired.
Looking back on the brief survey in the preceding three subsections, it can be seen that a wide range of computational methods and tools are available to the corpus linguist.
We have already seen a few examples of what corpus information can tell us.
Another distinguishing feature is that it is open to contributions by third parties, who can submit new material for inclusion in the corpus.
At the time, Rissanen was leading a group of scholars responsible for the compilation of the first diachronic corpus of English, the Helsinki Corpus of English Texts.
For the general set, you should sort according to type, and for the newspaper data, according to type_n.
Corpus linguistics has long championed, and pioneered, markup schemes to permit the systematic encoding of metadata and interpretative analyses within corpora.
The Brown Corpus was also the first corpus to be lexically tagged.
Creating a corpus for a communication course would, naturally, be more time consuming, but would also offer the same potential benefits.
Indeed, in the literature we can see objections to corpus linguistics which follow the anti-positivist critique, most notably with reference to context and subjectivity.
It will therefore be up to each researcher to identify the tool best suited to his corpus and his/her research question.
As can be seen from the above discussion, the 'web for corpus' approach is rather more complex than the previously described 'web as corpus surrogate' approach.
The smallest corpus in the list is CORE.
Before we start, please watch the tutorial on how to use the keyword feature in AntConc: www.youtube.com/watch?v=SludW4FHatI&list=PL iRIDpYmiC0SjJeT2FuysOkLa45HG_tIu&index=10.
Focusing on the first kind for a moment, it would be possible of course to manually annotate texts using any standard word processor, but here it is useful to have software tools that check annotation as it is added, e.g.
It opens with a discussion of the planning that went into the building of four different types of corpora: the British National Corpus (BNC), the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), the Corpus of Early English Correspondence (CEEC), and the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE).
During the process of reviewing the corpus-based research that uses bootstrapping, we have seen no evidence of bootstrapping results being misinterpreted or misrepresented.
Such corpora may draw on pre-existing texts, including those contained in a larger, general corpus, or include specifically collected texts, for example, texts elicited during controlled experiments.
Now we will consider the defining characteristics of corpus linguistics as they will be used in this book.
Now, while of course it's generally not possible for us to directly change the design of any corpus tools we may be using to allow us to deal with this issue, we at least ought to bear this 'handicap' in mind in many of our analyses, and see whether at least some of the tools allow us to avoid any of these problems, or whether we may be able to find a way to work around certain issues by manipulating our data ourselves in simple ways.
Section 4.5 discusses how corpus analyses can be quantitative, qualitative, or a combination of the two (sometimes termed mixed methods).
In addition, many journals specializing in different areas of linguistics, such as Journal of Pragmatics, Journal of Sociolinguistics and Journal of French Language Studies, regularly publish corpus studies.
Similarly, in the first half of the 20th Century in the United States, the so-called distributionist approach to syntax focused on the study of sentence formation in syntactic structures as they appeared in text corpora, and from there, tried to infer language's general functioning.
In order to be able to draw quantitative conclusions, it is necessary to carry out inferential statistical tests, which will indicate whether the results obtained on the corpus sample can be generalized to the entire population.
To do the latter on a subcorpus you've created, you can simply select your corpus from the BNCweb start page from the dropdown list next to where it reads 'Restrictions'.
The various interrelations between utterances in a discourse lead to (text/discourse) coherence so that interlocutors (or writers/readers) share the meaning built up during production and reception.
Annotation can also be applied using manual (human-led) and/or automatic (machine-led) methods.
We carry out a more indepth analysis of two of the four research questions listed above, namely how corpus-based research applications are presented, and how (and how much) corpus-based research has been incorporated into materials.
Searching and replacing text along the lines of what we just practised above is a very useful semi-automatic means of preparing your data efficiently, but you nevertheless constantly need to be aware of potential errors that might be introduced by replacing the wrong things or replacing them in the wrong order.
Corpus enrichement is an important way forward, and this applies not only to metadata but also to linguistic annotation.
Thus, you need to find something that distinguishes you code from any ordinary text, ideally by using characters that do not form a part of any normal text.
Corpus studies will, in tandem with other methods, have a continuing and important role to play in this endeavor.
There are many means to evaluate corpus-level variation (such as Kullback-Leibler divergence) in order to compare corpora with each other.
These matters include attempting to achieve comparability and representativeness, two important but sometimes mutually exclusive goals.
Digital humanities scholars cite the work of Roberto Busa working with IBM in 1949, who produced his Index Thomisticus, a computer-generated concordance to the writings of Thomas Aquinas.
This can lead to considerable distortions in the tagging of specific words 3.2 Operationalization and grammatical constructions.
This portion of the corpus comprises a longitudinal section, where each learner has produced four texts.
Next, to confirm your intuitions -and to verify the tagging -, hover over the hits to see which tag CLAWS assigned to them, and whether this is always unambiguous.
Treebank-3 consists of a heterogeneous collection of texts totaling 100 million words, including one million words of text taken from the 1989 Wall Street Journal, as well as tagged and parsed versions of the Brown Corpus.
In other words, we need to find a good balance between undersmoothing (resulting in too much wiggliness) and oversmoothing (resulting in missing out on significant wiggliness).
In isolation, 7 Collocation tell what the difference in meaning is, especially since they are often interchangeable at least in some contexts.
Through an iterative process, corpus pragmatics therefore moves beyond important but surface observations of lexico-grammatical patterns to allow a more nuanced interpretation of these patterns taking into consideration who uses them, where they were used, for what purposes, and how this use has changed over time.
Some concern methodology within corpus linguistics.
The five methods described above have all been defined in relation to words contained in a corpus.
A corpus of spontaneous conversations would need to contain unrehearsed conversations between two or more individuals in the types of settings in which such conversations are held, such as the family dinner table, a party, a chat between two friends, and so forth.
It has been widely accepted with Corpus Linguistics that collocation needs to be measured within a fairly short span: + / -5 words from the node is common.
At the very least, it is crucial to understand that tagging and other kinds of annotation are the result of applying operational definitions by other researchers and if we use tags or other forms of annotation, we must familiarize ourselves with these definitions by reading the fine manuals that typically accompany the corpus.
The virtue of working with a DIY corpus is that the design of the data can be tailored directly to the specific research question at hand.
The output below reports on a model that contains the type of newspaper as a second independent variable, which allows the regression to adjust the estimates for each newspaper type.
The other thing is that our expectations concerning the results may differ from the actual output of the concordancer, as you will hopefully have noticed while concordancing on the words this and in.
We must then take a closer look at what it means to study language on the basis of a corpus; this will be our concern in Section 2.2.
To conclude, corpus studies and experimental studies can often be used in a complementary way, and, when put together, they represent powerful tools for answering a good number of research questions.
Although all this is interesting information which is conventionally represented inside the document, as well as affecting its pagination/layout, it generally does not form part of the meaning potential of the text itself, which is what we're usually most interested in when we analyse texts from a linguistic point of view.
MS Word formats are avoided, as these add various types of information to the file and do not work with corpus tools such as concordance programs.
More generally, because the conditions under which language is produced are themselves subject to change, it is fundamentally impossible to compare linguistic 10 Diachronic Corpora 217 material only along its temporal dimension.
However, many kinds of questions require special kinds of corpora that have additional information or annotation, an issue we discuss further in Chapter 7.
We also need annotation schemes detailing how to distinguish proper names from other uses and how to identify of -constructions that encode relations that could also be encoded by the s-possessive.
Additionally, a corpus addressing this issue would need to have sub-corpora of relatively equal size.
As a consequence, the results that the majority of corpus-linguistic studies report are likely to be very anti-conservative (i.e., too likely to return a significant result) and imprecise (because the results are tainted to an unknown degree by idiosyncrasies from which one can, and should not, generalise) and, just to acknowledge that quite openly, this also applies potentially to several earlier studies of mine.
For instance, the TIMIT Acoustic-Phonetic Continuous Speech Corpus is made up of audio recordings of 630 speakers of eight major dialects of American English, where each speaker read phonetically rich sentences, a setting which is not exactly a natural communicative setting.
The corpora employed in the study were the ELFA corpus for primary data, and the 1.8-million-word MICASE corpus for reference data for its close match in content and construct to ELFA, but collected in native-speaker settings.
Follow the same steps to look at how many and what kinds of words you see in this text sample.
From this graph a user can select groups of data to compare against within the key word clouds, collocation networks and social network relationships, and how each of these aspects varies over time.
For our present purposes, it suffices to distinguish two broad varieties of concordancer that are used today.
In other words, corpus-illustrated linguistics simply replaces introspectively invented data with introspectively selected data and thus inherits the fallibility of the introspective method discussed in the previous chapter.
In the first phase of corpus studies, lexical items served as the point of departure, but corpuslinguistic assessments at present extend to pragmatic units like speech acts, and discourse studies are included in historical pragmatics.
Especially where the body of historical data is finite, disparate and severely biased, or where a corpus is to be used to study change over very long time periods, this is a perfectly defendable strategy.
More recently, so many texts are available in electronic formats that with very little work, they can easily be adapted for inclusion in a corpus.
A & B represent different speakers, where each speaker indication in the text is followed by a dot and the turn number.
The actual frequencies of words in a real corpus will differ to a certain extent from those predicted by this model.
As with representativeness, the issues around balance are fraught with difficultly, but the critical thing for the user of any corpus is to be actively aware of how that corpus is balanced, to think carefully about what this means for the generalisability of results based on that corpus.
If you need to change the encoding, though, where exactly this can be done, and also how you can see this, may vary.
Some tagging software is available, but there is an increasing need for corpus researchers to gain computational and statistical skills if they want to carry out more in-depth analyses.
By contrast, it is more rarely found in collocation with words indicating a role, as in he played an important role in his failure, in texts destined for children than in texts for adults.
As from the operationalization phase, it is also important to choose the corpus on which the study will be carried out.
When writing a paper of this type, you may want to think about writing a small paper for each of these five sections and then putting these sections together for the final product.
Thus, including something in a corpus without getting explicit permission from the copyright holder could involve copyright infringement.
Like the SBC, a corpus created with ELAN will have two components, namely, a set of media files with the raw audio and/or audio-visual data and a corresponding set of ELAN document files (a special kind of XML file).
A candlestick plot is a type of data visualization, where the development of a linguistic In addition, the colour of the box (filled vs unfilled) shows the direction of the change: a filled box shows decrease, unfilled increase.
Hence, it can be strategic to separate these two transcription tasks and this can be done best if the media recording is directly linked with its annotation.
A common measure of (token) accuracy is to report the number of correct tags in a corpus as a percentage of the total number of tags in the corpus, or more likely in some sample of the whole corpus extracted for the explicit purpose of checking accuracy (cf.
Information on gender (which is defined biologically in corpus linguistics) can be requested on a biographical form, and in written texts, one can often tell the gender of an individual by his or her first name.
While it is true that corpus linguistics has imposed itself in an incontestable manner in the English-speaking world and that a significant proportion of French-speaking researchers currently use these methods, the teaching of corpus linguistics still remains marginalized in France.
Find a short text and trial your system.
This could be done using the measure of referential distance discussed in Section 3.2 of Chapter 3, which (in slightly different versions) is the most frequently used operationalization in corpus linguistics.
Second, I am not using a logistic/multinomial model, (i.e., a model with a categorical response), for this example even though such models are more typical of corpus-linguistic applications.
The comparison revealed that translation choices were systematically less varied in the TED corpus than in other corpora.
However, in common with other fields, corpus pragmatics investigates the co-textual patterns of a linguistic item or items, which encompasses lexico-grammatical features such as collocation or semantic prosody.
In corpus linguistics, there could be clusters of observations defined by individual speakers, registers, genres, modes, lemmas, etc.
The most frequent word in the corpus, that is, de, has 4,461 occurrences, whereas the 32nd word has only 499 occurrences, representing almost 10 times fewer occurrences.
With its 24.4 million words it is a sizeable corpus, but what really sets it apart is the kind of text material it contains, with published transcripts of the spoken interactions in court.
At 3 years and 2 months old, at the end of the corpus, the most frequent word was I, with 48 occurrences.
In these cases, the classification is often based on common sense or on the pragmatism of the corpus designer, depending on the importance of subcategories for addressing the questions that the corpus is supposed to help study.
These measures play a role in situations where a negative outcome of a test is relevant (for example, with medical diagnoses); in corpus linguistics, this is generally not the case.
Specifically, I will make a case for what I call Open Corpus Linguistics.
Similarly, if I obtained permission to record all of a particular person's conversations in one week, then hopefully, while the person and his interlocutors usually are aware of their conversations being recorded, I will obtain authentic conversations rather than conversations produced only for the sake of my corpus.
This type of information is nonetheless crucial for the quantitative comparison of linguistic productions between the two genders.
One is to look at sequences of words which recur in a fixed order with high frequency in the corpus -these sequences are variously referred to as n-grams, clusters or lexical bundles.
Written texts, in contrast, are now widely available in digital formats and can easily be incorporated in a corpus after permission has been received to use a given text.
As illustrated in some of the corpus projects that compared COCA with the BYU-BNC corpus, the unequal sizes of these two corpora did not allow for straight frequency comparisons between the two corpora.
Typically, researchers verify that the people who contribute to a French corpus are native French speakers.
Nevertheless, there are recurrent challenges that both compilers and end users of diachronic corpora have to confront.
Type frequency -a count of all the unique types there are of something in a corpus So, in a corpus of a million words, there will be a million word tokens.
As with many of the levels of usage we have described here, certain annotations help corpus linguists look for the particular kinds of phenomena relevant to their studies of discourse.
We would find, for instance, that in a written English corpus the will probably be the most frequent word, but in conversational English the personal pronouns I and you are likely to top the list.
So, when we examine the adverb modifiers of adjectives, we know that the collocation scores probably exaggerate the association between the adverb absolutely and the adjective fabulous, as the scores are skewed by the frequent occurrences of the combination of those two words in names.
For instance, a "draft" directory is useful for early stages of corpus development and can contain spoken texts that are in the process of being transcribed or written texts that have been computerized but not proofread.
By tracing these relationships, it is possible to extract features of corpus sentences-subjects of active and passive verbs, objects of prepositions, etc.-that would be difficult to retrieve from searches of unannotated text alone.
The KWIC (keyword in context) concordances show the narrow linguistic co-text and provide perhaps the easiest and most useful way of getting acquainted with the material.
Complex questions, involving large data sets and requiring specialized knowledge of diverse domains such as language history, text traditions, and computational techniques, can be handled if information passes between specialists efficiently.
Residual errors are either corrected manually or in the case of very large corpora such as the Google Books corpus, they are left as such, because their prevalence is low enough not to significantly bias the results of a research.
Within the written section of the BNC, there's a 75:25 balance between 'informative' and 'imaginative' prose, where the latter also includes a certain amount of 'written-to-be-spoken' materials, i.e.
For example, it would be rather inappropriate to try to study the production of speech acts in the legal context by choosing a corpus exclusively based on a number of performative verbs such as demand, condemn, order that it contains, since this criterion would influence the results found in the analysis afterwards.
Some work in corpus linguistics has drawn on such resources, including panel survey data (e.g.
The main corpus, BFM 2016, includes 153 texts, corresponding to more than 4 million words.
Corpus linguists also challenge the clear distinction made in generative grammar between competence and performance, and the notion that corpus analyses are overly descriptive rather than theoretical.
The specific design of annotation systems is codetermined by the specific research interests involved and therefore, we will need to refer to various research projects time and again.
But while printed texts can be easily included in a corpus, spoken texts still have to be manually transcribed: no voice recognition software can accurately produce a transcription because of the complexities of spoken language, particularly spontaneous conversation with its numerous hesitations, incomplete sentences, and reformulations.
The very fact that the corpus is a sample means that we need to think carefully about how our sample relates to the population, which means we need a detailed and critical awareness of the process of sampling that has been used in corpus construction.
One is simply to sample a larger number of texts, which will make it statistically more likely that the full range of internal variation is present in each period sample.
Such linkages between theory and practice are important because they, on the one hand, avoid the oft-made criticism of corpus linguists that they are mainly "bean counters"linguists who fail to make connections between theory and usagewith too little attention paid to the theoretical underpinnings of the data they are describing.
Remember also the issue with the 40 token threshold, explained in note 14.
For example, adjectives such as gentil or gentille (in French) are the masculine and feminine variants of the same word (or type) from a morphological point of view.
Thus, to be able to work more efficiently with a concordancer or similar search tool, it would be very useful to be able to specify more complex patterns that we could then look for all at once, and also make use of the other useful options we've explored before, such as sorting, etc., to help us simplify our analysis procedures.
You may optionally also be able to specify an encoding, and if this is available, you should definitely select 'UTF-8 ' here.
Some of these formats are rather constrained in the types of information that can be added to a document, while others are more flexible, but sometimes even the less flexible ones can be 'coerced' into allowing us to add suitable types of annotation.
For the comparison of the first and last recording, we just generate regular scatterplots of type-token ratios against mlus, but we jitter the points to avoid overplotting and add the usual grid.
For example, for meaning (3), the Nouveau Petit Robert mentioned "a woman's companion", whereas the corpus showed that this use also extends to homosexual couples.
When building general reference corpora from the web we need to choose seed words that are likely to appear across a wide range of topics, but there has been some debate about exactly what constitute good seeds for a corpus of this type.
Hyperlinks are preserved and rendered in angle brackets (<…>), italicised text surrounded by forward slashes (/…/), and underlined text surrounded by underscores (_…_).
Corpus linguistic studies have been brought to bear on universals of use for a long time.
SGML also has two other major disadvantages compared to HTML or XML, the first being that it absolutely requires a DTD (Document Type Definition) specifying its structure, in order to allow any type of serious processing, and -last but not least -that it's not supported by any 'standard' (browser) software.
I cannot think of any other scientific discipline whose textbook authors would feel compelled to begin their exposition by defending the use of observational data, and yet corpus linguistics textbooks often do exactly that.
For example, if an initial distinction proves impossible to discern sensibly in the corpus by the annotators, it should be abandoned.
The third analytical step addresses this question with a quantitative analysis that compares formations with -ment across the diachronic stages with regard to several structural and semantic variables.
Thus, studies that attempt such segmentation currently require a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches, using models from previous literature but making modifications based on the actual corpus in question.
A number of factors underlying these preferences have been suggested and investigated using quantitative corpus-linguistic methods.
That is, it is not meant as a final analysis of all the sentences in the corpus but as a means to retrieve with greater ease data that is of potential research interest and that is otherwise nearly impossible to collect.
Metadata is generated at various parts of the documentation process, as discussed above.
Because each set of data under a node is looked at anew, the same variable can be used again in a lower level of the tree, with whatever levels are still relevant for that node.
LCR as a field only emerged and became visible in the course of the 1990s in the context of the popularization of corpus linguistics at large but has rapidly evolved and grown in scope and sophistication over the past four decades.
This type of basic initial coding needn't be very complex, but can consist of a few easily identifiable markers that you insert somewhere in a text.
In other words, while the newer lists should be lauded for their more careful compilation and choice of lemma over word family for its superior discrimination of different senses of meaning, perhaps a way forward is to explore the lexicon beyond single orthographic words, to aim instead for the lexeme over the lemma.
Retrieval and annotation are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Obligatory: Obtaining (relative) frequencies from the corpus of the linguistic variable of interest for each of the periods (e.g.
Adding new annotations to a spoken corpus, however, can still constitute a major challenge for the simple lack of suitable tools although great advances have been made in the last decade in terms of the interoperability of the major tools in use for spoken corpus construction: ELAN, Praat, EXMARaLDA and ANVIL (see Sect.
This is a good question, and I myself used Perl for corpus processing before I turned to R. However, I think I also have a good answer to why to use R instead.
When starting an annotation project, it is advisable to gather information about the existence of such standards and to consult previous studies to decide on the best way to annotate data.
For each node (or sub-group), the data is then split into two more sections based on which data points are most different from each other using the remaining independent variables and remaining levels of independent variables.
Uncheck the box for 'N-Grams', and type in fair as your search term.
The corpus has been lemmatized and tagged into grammatical categories, which also helps in refining the search criteria.
Such semi-structured elicitation techniques may also be used where a phenomenon is frequent enough in a typical corpus, but where the researcher wants to vary certain aspects systematically, or where the researcher wants to achieve comparability across speakers or even across languages.
This corpus was collected and transcribed in 2012 and includes 50 interactions between registered nurses working at a US hospital and standardized patients (SPs).
After this initial exploration, to answer the research question about the prominent topics in British public discourse we need to look at the weather terms in the context of other words (lemmas) in the corpus.
From roughly this point onwards, at least some of the following hapax legomena appear to be proper names, so this is perhaps where the tagging errors gradually begin to peter out.
The more corpus approaches are interested in the literary quality of texts and intrinsic analytical goals, the more these approaches have to become interdisciplinary.
As such, parsing represents an implementation within a computerised text of the traditional tree-diagram style of syntactic analysis; for that reason parsed corpora are often called treebanks.
Thus, the pressing academic quest is to review past achievements as well as future directions of corpus linguistics.
These are the result of linguistic analysis and as such not appropriate for a corpus, but are good to be included in the apparatus once texts are collected.
Ideally, we would do this by searching a large corpus for actual examples of paraphrases with the s-possessive, but let us assume that this is too time-consuming (a fair assumption in many research contexts) and that we want to rely on introspective judgments instead.
We can also calculate their mean frequency (19 996.50), but again, this is not a mean of the two constructions, but of their frequencies in one particular corpus.
The motivation for this study is that no previous studies have used corpus linguistic methods to investigate differences in the use of linguistic features by patients and nurses across the phases of an interaction.
Once annotation has been carried out, however, quantification can be carried out.
If the corpus-building effort is for a language that has been documented by different people or even by the same person over several years, there may be multiple orthographies that will require standardisation.
If no encoding is specified, it always defaults to UTF-8, so that all basic ASCII characters occurring in English documents are always displayed correctly, even without explicitly having to convert existing ASCII encoded documents to UTF-8, as the basic code points are the same.
This chapter will explain some of the most frequently used quantitative techniques in corpus linguistics today, such as logistic mixed-effects regression, as well as focus on some newer techniques becoming more popular, such as classification trees (and random forests) which are types of recursive partitioning.
Specific requirements of diachronic research simply need to be met in different ways.
In such a corpus, data are collected from the same subjects at different time intervals, so as to reflect the development of their language skills over time.
Similarly, a corpus may contain samples of present-day use of a language, while the other may contain samples from old texts; a corpus may be monolingual with a collection of data from a single language, while another may be bilingual or multilingual by including texts from two or more languages; texts included in a corpus may be collected from one source, two sources or many sources of a particular field or across fields.
In addition, humans can also make mistakes due to fatigue, lack of attention or a poor understanding of the annotation instructions.
When looking at occurrences of linguistic items in this way, they are referred to as types; the type frequency of the s-possessive in the BNC is 268 450 (again, ignoring upper and lower case).
We summarize those in a matrix, to which we apply prop.table to get the percentages of split infinitives, and then plot with text and abline to visualize the adverbs' preference for the split construction.
Style sheet languages come in different flavours for different markup languages, namely DSSSL for SGML, CSS 1, 2 & 3 for HTML, and both CSS & XSL for XML.
To distinguish this type of collection from other collections of texts, we will refer to it as a linguistic corpus, and the term corpus will always refer to a linguistic corpus in this book unless specified otherwise.
In addition, research on the metaphorical uses of a word must be subject to manual annotation on the basis of their context, since metaphors have no lexical markers that make it possible to differentiate them from the literal uses of the same words.
For example, this step could involve calculating the number of sentences in the passive voice used in a corpus of journal articles.
The main response to such criticism is that these areas are based on the use of quantitative methods (namely inferential statistics), which make it possible to draw conclusions from a sample and to extrapolate them to an entire population.
The International Corpus of English (ICE) contains comparable one million-word corpora of spoken and written English representing the major national varieties of English, including English as it is spoken and written in countries such as Ireland, Great Britain, the Philippines, India, and many other varieties as well.
We will also discuss best practices to follow when making a manual annotation and present the different ways to assess the reliability of such annotations.
While the keywords in the GU corpus appear more neutral and related to the theoretical aspects of the immigration debate (economic, argument, debate), the keywords found in the DM corpus predominately point to negative aspects of immigration (homeless, benefits, police, squatters).
Another study could aim to compare these uses across different speech styles, which should then be represented in the corpus in a balanced manner.
The keyness of the former is due to the fact that one of the files in the BNC Baby commercial subcorpus is from the Northern Echo, a regional newspaper covering County Durham and Teesside -Middlesbrough is the largest town in this region and is thus mentioned frequently, but it is not generally an important town, so it is hardly mentioned outside of this text.
Having said that, we hope to see both of these things happening in corpus linguistic research.
Such evaluation can also demonstrate that a list is indeed specialized if it provides higher coverage of a specialized corpus than of a general corpus.
If our sample contains five 50-year-olds and five 30-year-olds, it makes perfect sense to say that the mean age in our sample is 40; we might need additional information to distinguish between this sample and another sample that consists of 5 41-year-olds and 5 39-year-olds, that would also have a mean age of 40 (cf.
Therefore, not just the age and gender of speakers in the corpus were recorded but their academic discipline (e.g.
For a number of research questions, this type of information is crucial, for example, when it comes to determining the meaning of a derived word.
There are a few distinctions you should be familiar with if only to be able to find the right corpus for what you want to investigate.
Indeed, this needs addressing before it is possible to determine fully the design of a corpus.
The variety of topics, the copra volume employed and languages studied to provide us a powerful tone that corpus and corpus-based research is a lifelike domain of research.
If we take the two sample studies as an example, they would both have benefitted from multimodal data.
As mentioned, Wmatrix performs both automatic annotation and retrieval.
Representative is a descriptor of a sample when it has similar characteristics to the population it is drawn from.
In cases like these, the concept of minimal token is essentially tantamount to timeline indices, and if these have explicit references to time (as in the seconds and milliseconds in the 'time' layer of Fig.
Since neither informative nor imaginative writing is homogeneous, the corpus contained 2,000-word samples from a range of different articles, periodicals, books, and so forth to provide as broad a range as possible of different authors, books, periodicals, and so forth.
We have to realise that in corpora we typically sample data at the level of texts/speakers.
Statistical models are prone to overfitting to the sample they are based on (i.e.
Since a corpus contains text samples either from a written or spoken discourse, annotation is done by adopting a value-encoding process, which attaches interpretative information at different levels of a text.
Examples of type a) allow us to work with different dialectal variants, or sometimes also to cover spelling variants in historical texts, where the spelling may not yet have been standardised, so that even one and the same text may contain alternate forms that represent exactly the same word meaning.
In doing so, he determines per text (and thus per speaker) what he calls its referential density (RD).
For example, in the Littéracie avancée corpus, the five most frequent cooccurrences to the right of the word avis are avis sur, which appears 11 times and then avis et (six times), avis de (five times), avis divergent (four times) and avis des (three times).
To carry out this test, let us set aside the values of the canton of Geneva, which is under-represented in the corpus, with only 75,598 words (against more than 100,000 in all the other cantons).
On the other hand, given the unreliability and questionable epistemological status of intuition data, we cannot simply use them, as some corpus linguists suggest (e.g.
Unfortunately, corpus linguists have long paid insufficient attention to this (and I include much of my own research in this criticism).
Metadata and Textual Markup are more descriptive, noting, respectively, what is in a corpus and where, for instance, paragraph boundaries in a written corpus occur or speakers pause in a spoken corpus.
Of course, most programmers are very willing to explain what they mean, so the corpus linguist should always ask for clarification where necessary.
The representativeness of a corpus also depends on its balance and the choice of samples it contains.
We can also address different levels of annotation at different positions in a query.
This is obviously useful if you are using one of the systems mentioned above, but if not, the transparency of the syntax should allow you to translate the query into whatever possibilities your concordancer offers you.
The primary aim of corpus linguistics is to understand linguistic patterns and explore how and why they occur.
Imagine further that a number of corpus-based studies had examined this issue using different corpora, with each study yielding a result expressed in occurrences per million words.
Such a corpus would make it possible to compare the ways of speaking in a similar context in two languages and two different cultures.
Within a text, some words may be restricted to particular sections, which is also useful to know.
On the one hand, the possibility of representing language electronically rather than as visual marks on paper, together with the development of electronic media, infrastructure, and computational tools for creation, emendation, storage, and transmission of electronic text have led to a rapid increase in the number and size of corpora available to the linguist, and these are now at or beyond the limit of what an individual researcher can efficiently use in the traditional way.
The fact that its metadata is very sparse here adds a further downside (cf.
In some corpora, this may be the interpretation of the speakers themselves (i.e., the corpus creators may have asked the speakers to specify their sex), in other cases this may be the interpretation of the corpus creators (based, for example, on the first names of the speakers or on the assessment of whoever collected the data).
While it is quite common for corpora to contain meta-information about the data that they contain, should a collection of unrelated sentences and associated paraphrases be considered a corpus?
If relevant to your research goal, is the corpus constructed so that specific sub-corpora are readily retrievable?
But in this case, a version without misspellings should also be included so that the words can be found by a concordancer.
If you're using Text-Wrangler on the Mac, you need to trigger the replace operation through the 'Find' functionality ( + f) and then fill in the replacement term.
The poem has 107 tokens (see Section 2.2 for a definition of 'token').
While there is no clear-cut limit, we can state that a corpus is more representative if it achieves higher saturation.
For instance, you could type this to load the package dplyr: library(dplyr) ¶.
Node words tend to attract some words -such that these words occur close to the node word with greater than chance probability -while they repel others -such that these words occur close to the node word with less than chance probability -while they occur at chance-level frequency with yet others.
If we calculate the normalized frequency of first-person pronouns in this text, we get as the result 200 first-person pronouns per 1,000 words.
Syntactic annotation will probably become more standard in years to come, given recent advances in multilingual parsing (e.g.
For our example text, these regexes return the same information.
The study is a good example of a fully corpus-driven analysis which allows generalizations to emerge bottom-up from the learner data.
Nevertheless, these data do not necessarily represent a corpus stricto sensu, since they do not contain extracts of language produced naturally.
The Brown Corpus is composed of just 500 texts, and it is very easy to achieve 100 percent accuracy in terms of metadata.
In response, research disciplines devoted to information abstraction from very large collections of electronic text have come into being.
The differences in their TTRs suggests that mini-, in its own right, is much more central in the English lexicon than -icle, even though the latter has a much higher token frequency.
A lemma is a group of word-forms that are judged to constitute a single entry in the lexicon of the language -different inflectional forms of a single dictionary headword.
Unlike in older forms of HTML, where case did not matter, XML is case sensitive, so that linguistic tags like <turn>, <Turn> & <TURN> for representing individual speaker turns in dialogues are all treated as being different from one another.
The second section contains a review of relevant previous studies (also called the state of the art), which served as a theoretical basis for the study, or which are inspired on other corpus studies that the current research project will supplement or sometimes call into question.
An alternative approach to large indiscriminate crawls is to focus on specific websites, thus limiting the size of the textual universe and increasing the chances of building a representative corpus.
Nevertheless, with all three types of resources, it is certainly possible to see the frequency of an exact word or phrase, and of course the number of tokens will typically be much larger than with a 100-or 500-million-word corpus.
Finally, we should bear in mind that the usefulness of lemmatization may change significantly from language to language.
Raising the level of analysis might be considered a special case of the principled metadata-based combining approach.
In the late 2000s and early 2010s, studies about exploiting corpus were conducted concerning referencingcompiled corpus for language learning, especially in academic writing.
Sampling methodology can also be used to select the particular individuals whose speech and writing will be included in a corpus.
The original idea behind its name is that it was to be used to retrieve corpora of web pages that could form a web-based counterpart to the corpora contained in the International Corpus of English (ICE) we discussed in Chapter 2.
Some common examples include the annotation of semantic roles or other properties linked to reference, syntactic dependencies, speech acts, errors on various levels, or actions accompanying speech (gaze and pointing).
For example, before deciding to include an interview with a young Brussels resident in a corpus of French spoken in Belgium, we should make sure that this person has not recently moved to Belgium from another country, and that they properly reflect the linguistic specificities that the corpus is supposed to embody.
However, raw data is not necessarily all that the corpus contains.
This shows a very strong likelihood for woman to be preceded by a, meaning the collocation of these words is highly predictable.
Subsequent sections discuss other topics relevant to planning the building of a corpus, such as defining exactly what a corpus is.
First, by combining close reading with statistical "overview" analysis, very generally of a large number of tokens of the discourse type under scrutiny, which can enable the analyst to build up a detailed picture of how work is typically performed in that type of discourse.
Let us further limit our sample to cases where both nouns are monosyllabic, as it is known from the existing research literature that length and stress patterns have a strong influence on the order of binomials.
Thus, the hopefully not too high-flying goal of this paper is to become for corpus linguistics what the abovequoted papers have become for psycholinguistics: a first go-to resource that explains to corpus linguists what (generalised) linear mixed-effects/multilevel modelling ((G)LMM/MLM) has to offer and that provides them with a concrete example and some instructions on how to perform such analyses.
We say "simply", but this task is only simply carried out when the corpus is POS-tagged and one is able to search for the verb EXPERIENCE immediately followed by a noun.
In order to determine whether the BNC can be considered a balanced corpus with respect to Speaker Sex, we can compare this observed distribution of speakers to the expected one more or less exactly in the way described in the previous sections except that we have two alternative ways of calculating the expected frequencies.
He observes a higher incidence of complex prepositions in the Kolhapur Corpus than in the other two corpora.
The focus is on abstract data models and the ways in which they are realized in concrete formats for corpus representation, as well as consequences for the usability of the resulting corpora.
The final method in the corpus toolbox is collocation.
This approach prioritizes coverage of synchronic variability, to the best level achievable and with no prior assumptions made.
Following the works of American linguist Noam Chomsky, it changed from the essentially rationalist discipline it had been since the middle of the 20th Century, and gradually (re)opened up the empirical approaches represented by corpus linguistics and experimental linguistics.
It needs to be explained that pragmatic research which truly focuses on language in use has to be corpus-based because there is no convenient way of making speakers say what you want them to say where language is unpredictable, messy, and extended over many turns.
The texts from this corpus were collected under two different conditions: First, the students were placed into pairs and asked to write a problem-solution paragraph collaboratively.
Your corpus has 4,049 files, so you know you will have one results vector for all files' lengths in words (with 4,049 slots), and another results vector for all files' lengths in sentences (with 4,049 slots) (see Section 5.2.4 for a similar application).
They confirmed that some of the meanings frequently found in the corpus could not be adequately translated by their "equivalent".
The key concepts here are the notions of the corpus as a sample and of balance and representativeness.
If we can assume that a sample is representative of a given population, it is safe to assume that (a) values observed in the sample are possible in the population, and (b) the distribution of those values in the sample can be used to estimate their distribution in the population.
In studying variation by gender in ICE-GB, the analyst will want to review the results with caution, since this corpus does not contain a balanced sample of males and females.
Adding annotation allows the researcher to encode linguistic information present in the corpus for later retrieval or extraction using tools described in the next section.
Lemmatization can be an extremely useful tool in the corpus builder's toolkit, especially when searches of the annotated corpus may need to be run over many inflected forms.
First, most of these papers are psycholinguistic in nature and involve experimental data of the kind prevalent in psycholinguistic analyses, which could, understandably, make it more difficult to a core corpus linguist to translate their messages into 'his or her language'.
A good example of such a corpus is the British National Corpus (BNC).
The mode is simply the most frequent value in a sample, so the modifiers of the of -possessive have a mode of 5 (or concrete touchable) and those of the s-possessive have a mode of 1 (or human) with respect to animacy (similarly, we could have said that the mode of s-possessive modifiers is discourse-old and the mode of of -possessive modifiers is discourse-new).
In the foregoing example, the researcher-defined variables personality type, motivation, scholastic record, and score on intelligence tests might be replaced by a 'general intelligence' variable based on similarity of variability among these variables in the data, and family background, class, ethnicity, age, and health with a 'social profile' one, thereby reducing data dimensionality from nine to two.
For other types of text such as letters, text messages, etc., the units are so small that it makes no sense to not fully include them.
In 2011, a TEI-XML version of the corpus was released.
In this chapter, we will explore how to insert other types of information into a corpus as linguistic annotations.
As you've hopefully seen, this kind of comparison between two different varieties is quite easy to carry out in the BYU web interface, and you can also use your knowledge of the query syntax to investigate further varieties through the Corpus of Global Web-Based English (GloWbE), which is accessible through the same interface.
In other words, if there were no relationship between the article type and the position, we would get an even distribution of the frequencies.
The problem, after all, is not so much that each data point becomes less reliable if we add more annotation categories, but rather that we often do not have enough data points to obtain a truly informative picture when addressing research questions that require us to take many categories into account simultaneously.
On the other hand, the history of many fiction genres, including drama and short stories, is certainly longer than the coverage of COHA, so their proportions could have been more optimally balanced in the corpus; considering the automated sampling of COHA, their better representation in the most recent periods probably reflects their increased availability in digital form.
In all these fields, the use of text corpora has been obvious for a long time and corpora use was never interrupted as a result of Chomsky's work.
The task of sampling of texts has to be done with collected text materials based on the character of a corpus.
The corpus contains interviews, narrations based on videos, and images.
However, if there will be any commercial use of the corpus, special arrangements will have to be made both with publishers supplying copyrighted texts and those making use of the corpus.
Typically, researchers have relied on changes in discourse function, or what particular stretches of a text are contributing to the overall purpose of the discourse.
A token is a single instance of any word at a particular place in the corpus; a type is an individual word-form, which can occur many times in the corpus: thus one type is usually instantiated by multiple tokens.
One example from Cameron's writing is the significantly above-average use of is; which was the fifth most frequent keyword in her corpus.
This annotation makes it possible to exclusively look for the noun occurrences of ferme, for example.
The situation is somewhat easier if we need to distinguish between proper nouns and common nouns, as far as we can rely on the accuracy of the tagging.
Annotations covering the entire corpus are often made using computing tools, which we will describe in the next section.
However, the larger our corpus is (and most corpus-linguistic research requires corpora that are much larger than the four million words used here), the less feasible it becomes to do so.
Try your hand with the different options by looking up any keyword you wish so you can see what kinds of information is available to you!
Another element to take into consideration before deciding to download an entire corpus is its size.
In particular, a corpus-based approach is especially conducive to the analysis of quantitative grammatical variation, because it allows for large samples of natural language to be collected for analysis, and for dialect variation to be observed and compared across a variety of communicative situations.
For example, it is a good environment for adding annotations to a text, it has excellent multimedia capabilities, and it is XML-compatible.
Second, just like a corpus, a speaker's linguistic experience is limited to certain language varieties: most English speakers have never been to confession or planned an illegal activity, for example, which means they will lack knowledge of certain linguistic structures typical of these situations.
We will return to annotation in the next section; let us deal briefly here with metadata and markup by discussing some examples of how they may be used to enhance a linguistic analysis -and, thus, the reason corpus builders invest effort into adding them into the corpus in the first place!
Specifically, in order to deal with multiple files at the same time, we want to write a script that reads in multiple CHAT files and outputs a list or a data frame with all utterances in the rows and all annotation tiers in the columns; this will allow us to perform nice searches with regular expressions on multiple tiers to identify the rows where different strsplit the file apart again, unlist, and retain (with grep) only those with utterances or their annotation.
By the same token, where it exceeds the abilities of some corpus tools, it is not necessarily the case that those corpus tools are lacking; they were simply developed for a different set of users.
Metadata can be integrated into a corpus in various ways.
Moreover, once such a corpus is created, it is less straightforward to study sociolinguistic variables than it is to study genre variation.
Does each text have a specific code and/or header information so that specific information in each file is identifiable?
This means that spoken and signed texts are not immediately available for inclusion in a corpus, but are transcribed, that is, what is being said or signed is written down according to specific conventions, for example, the conventions of the International Phonetic Association (IPA), which are in turn based on specific writing systems.
Corpus-based studies begin with lexical expressions (e.g.
We will then focus on the freely available AntConc concordancer, and introduce some of its functionalities.
In the worst case, they will consciously perform an introspection-based analysis of a phenomenon and then scour the corpus for examples that support this analysis; we could call this method corpus-illustrated linguistics (cf.
To limit our searches to lemmas by specifying a PoS, BNCweb provides us with two separate options, both based on the following simplified (representation of a) tagset: To specify the lemma form, BNCweb allows two different variants.
In an XML document, anything inside <angled brackets> is part of a tag; anything outside angled brackets is part of the text itself.
The annotations are called 'tags' because they are appended to corpus words, as shown in example (7.5) from the Brown corpus.
An annotation of cleft structures in French can start by looking up structures containing the verb form c'est.
The other corpora include children up to the age of 7, and only one of them (VionColas corpus) includes children up to 11 years old.
We will discuss this topic in Chapter 6, which is devoted to the methodological principles underlying the construction of a corpus.
For instance, how could it be compared with the BNC2014, a more modern corpus that is directly modeled after the BNC?
Most of the time, however, it merely consists in testing the statistical significance of the results (e.g.
However, there are ways to increase the probability that that the speech included in a corpus will be natural and realistic.
Metadata can consist of different types of information.
However, the corpus linguist, analyzing and classifying real data, soon discovers that gradience is a reality.
He develops software programs that are extremely useful for corpus linguistic analyses and he makes them freely available (although you are able to make a donation should you choose to do so).
It is therefore imperative that corpus linguists follow the lead of recent developments in psycholinguistics and make mixed-effects/multi-level modeling a central analytical tool: without it, we will never know how much of an effect is interesting, and how much is just due to particular speakers sampled in a corpus.
However, at this point in time, quantitative corpus linguistics is becoming more and more established also in specific linguistic subdisciplines, which raise their own, more specialized problems.
But even in a lexical corpus, the numerous concordancing programs that are currently available can greatly facilitate searches.
The inclusion in the Brown Corpus of many different types of written English made it quite suitable for the qualitative analysis of language usage.
GRAID differs from other syntactic annotation system like the Treebank II annotations discussed in 7.2.4 in that zeroes are confined to instances where they contrast with a possible overt form, so that, for example, notional subjects of infinitive clause constructions in English do not receive a regular zero annotation.
However, here the focus has been on the tools and methods used in the field of (English) corpus linguistics.
Although some of these regularities had been suggested a long time ago, corpus linguistic approaches are capable of discovering regularities that have not been dealt with in classic typological research.
Diachronic corpora sample different stages of language or discourse development across time.
The problem with the type/token ratio is that it is very sensitive to the size of a corpus (for this reason, the type/token value 9/12 = 0.25 obtained for sentence (1) is in no way representative).
Text A comes from a newspaper, text B from a novel.
What is interesting here is that even if the value of 120 in text no.
This holds a fortiori for the complex interrogation of diachronic corpora.
These meet the criterion of having been produced in a natural setting because journalists write the article to be published in newspapers and to communicate something to their readers, not because they want to fill a linguist's corpus.
First, in terms of research focus, we would hope the future would bring more discourse-level studies with a focus on text and associated features of genre, stance, etc., to complement the current dominance of studies on lexis and specific grammar points.
Whatever the annotation considered and the tag set chosen, the annotation of the first occurrences is generally difficult and many problems and borderline cases arise.
Large corpora will often contain a fair number of errors, missing metadata, and incorrectly coded information.
In the case of a speech corpus, on the other hand, it is linked with the total number of sentences, unique words (types), and total words (tokens) in a corpus.
These annotations imply a global processing of the corpus.
We discussed in Chapter 3.1 how the size and composition of a corpus reflect in various degrees its representativeness and saturation.
While CV tells us about the amount of variation in the corpus (larger CV means more variation in the frequencies), Juilland's D tells us about homogeneity of the distribution (larger Juilland's D means a more even distribution and less variation).
Unfortunately, the latter type of operational definition is more common in linguistics (and the social sciences in general), but there are procedures to deal with the problem of subjectiveness at least to some extent.
What are the characteristics of the corpus thus created?
Instead of providing a range of methods and linguistic examples to demonstrate the usefulness of corpus stylistics more generally, the study creates a coherent argument for a theoretical approach to characterization in Dickens.
Posts were inspected to extract only those written by people with cancer (as opposed to family members, carers, or those experiencing symptoms that may be associated with cancer), which resulted in a final corpus comprising 12,757 posts and 1,629,370 words.
Given the vast range of corpus-linguistic research designs, these three tests will not always be the ideal choice.
During each iteration, we will use grep to find all corpus sentences.
Due to the history of the project, certain limitations apply with respect to the diachronic bias inherent in individual components and across regional varieties.
If that information is recorded in a machine searchable way, like through FLEX or other programs, then that material can become an annotated corpus.
Based on the 6.5-million-word British Academic Written English (BAWE) corpus, the study develops a genre classification to identify and describe thirteen major types of assignment according to their purpose, stages, genre networks, and characteristic language features.
At each step we consider and discuss both best practices as well as some of the many challenges unique to meta-analyzing research in corpus linguistics.
In principle, the former only applies to corpora for general use, though, as it's often assumed that these ought to provide an equal amount of materials from many different genres or areas of relevance that allow us to investigate a representative and realistic sample of the language and draw more or less universally applicable conclusions.
But the easy access to textual data online has allowed quantitative corpus linguists to cast a wider net in terms of their research topics than ever before.
The much higher rate of complex NPs in written registers may also be due to considerations of mode and reception alone: a reader will have more time to process complex structures, and knowledge of this fact may carry over to considerations of text production.
Most concordance packages support at least some basic forms of regexes, although they're not necessarily as advanced as the options offered by command-line search utilities, such as (e)grep (global regular expression printer), or programming languages, such as Perl, Python, or Java.
After Tim Berners-Lee had invented the World Wide Web (WWW) in 1989, it was necessary to develop a new, and simpler, markup language in order to take full advantage of the new hypertext medium.
Even if register is controlled, the set of lexical phrases identified in a large corpus (containing more words) will probably be different than the set of phrases identified in a small corpus.
Given the straightforward logic underlying the notion of dispersion, the huge impact it can have, and the fact that dispersion can correlate as strongly as frequency with experimental data (see Gries 2010c), dispersion and corpus homogeneity should be at the top of the to-do list of research on corpus-linguistic statistics.
The corpus includes images of handwritten texts, raw transcriptions in text format and an annotated transcription, also in text format.
TigerXML is a more expressive XML format, capable of representing multiple node annotations, crossing edges, edge labels and two distinct types of edges.
In a recent effort this corpus scheme has been extended to daylong recordings (cf.
We have made an important distinction between descriptive statistics (which relate only to the sample tested) and inferential statistics (which aim to generalize the results to an entire population).
For instance, to evaluate whether a language has been changing over time requires metadata not only on the time of text production but also on the demographic features of people like their age.
Unfortunately, the CLAWS tagging simply 'lumps' all these meanings together, using a single general adverb tag for all of them, which again proves the point that taggers like CLAWS are really optimised for written language, but often still have a number of problems when it comes to dealing with spoken language appropriately.
The tool also gives users interactive and reactive power throughout all the data, which not only offers a corpus to analyse, but a corpus to interact with and query in a more organic way, compared to more traditional approaches of presenting corpora.
This raises the question as to why corpus creators go to the trouble of attempting to create representative corpora at all, and why some corpora seem to be more successful attempts than others.
In the long run, linguistic theorising without a firm grip on statistical methods will lead corpus linguistics into a dead-end street.
However, under the definition of corpus linguistics adopted in this book, Sinclair's observations would be just the first step towards a full analysis.
This way we can investigate patterns in larger units such as a text.
Quite commonly one and the same verb takes different kinds of complement with different relative frequencies, such that one type is preferred and other ones are more marginal.
This result may be taken to suggest that the method is not ideal for very small text collections, or that different parameters and thresholds should be used in these cases.
A small spoken or signed corpus, therefore, can still be a good representation of how people use their language.
However, since it's somewhat of a nuisance having to do this all the time, apart from being error-prone, it's quite useful to be able to specify a search for all different forms of a headword or lemma.
The corpus only shows you the result of the speakers' production, but not what led to these results.
Metadata and textual markup are important because they can narrow the range of possible choices when a corpus is searched.
For instance, lemmatisation allows frequency lists to be compiled at the level of the dictionary headword, which may subsume many distinct word-forms.
Once you've finished exploring, select 'Dialogue' from 'Interaction Type', and 'Leisure' from the 'Domain' options, respectively.
Overall, 942,232 tokens were extracted from the Guardian (GU corpus) and 2,149,493 from the Daily Mail (DM corpus).
In (9a), there is ellipsis of were before the past participle placed in the second conjunct and since the passive tag attaches only to the be auxiliary in this tagging system, the passive structure in the second conjunct is not identified automatically.
This has consequences for corpus linguisticsthose areas which routinely draw upon corpus approaches, for example CADS (see Nartey and Mwinlaaru 2019, for an overview), the broad area of teaching and language corpora (e.g.
This is because it has a serious problem: recall that it cannot be applied if more than 20 percent of the 7 Collocation cells of the contingency table contain expected frequencies smaller than 5 (in the case of collocates, this means not even one out of the four cells of the 2-by-2 table).
For the former, our table contains the frequencies of "perl" in each corpus part (in the column for TRUEs), which we can divide by the overall frequency of "perl" in the file to get percentages (to be stored in a vector called obs.percs), and we can use the function rowSums to compute the corpus part sizes in percentage in a vector exp.percs (which should all be really close to 10 percent, given how we split the corpus up into ten parts above), from which we can compute DP.
Indeed, we wish to emphasize that resources like COHA are invaluable for diachronic linguistic research, and that these resources are even more useful when one knows exactly how they are constructed and annotated.
Because of the difficulties in obtaining permission to use copyrighted materials, most corpus compilers have found themselves collecting far more written material than they are able to obtain permission to use: for ICE-USA, permission had been obtained to use only about 25 percent of the written texts initially considered for inclusion in the corpus.
To do justice to examples such as (5), a corpus architecture must be capable of mapping word forms and annotations to any number of tokens, in the sense of minimal units.
For example, in the British National Corpus, tagged with CLAWS 5, gonna is segmented into gon (VVG) and na (TO), tagged just like the unreduced equivalent going to would be.
Now let's have a look at a set of examples that illustrate the annotation practice and the rationale behind the system.
In this way, corpus pragmatics has retained in part its original interpretative nature but has endeavored to supply this interpretation with objective supporting evidence.
The first part of this chapter reviews the growing body of research that analyzes dialect variation in corpora, including research on variation across nations, regions, genders, ages, and classes, in both speech and writing, and from both a synchronic and diachronic perspective, with a focus on dialect variation in the English language.
In order to do so, in the past corpus compilers have frequently resorted to using samples of approximately 2,000 words from different texts and genres to achieve balance, but both that number and 'cutting out' part of a text appear fairly arbitrary, and may in fact make such samples somewhat unrepresentative of the texts they're supposed to represent as a whole.
NVivo has some strengths that corpus linguists should consider seriously.
After a text was numbered, it was given a short name providing descriptive information about the sample.
This corpus should contain original texts in French and their translation in English.
As to the former assumption, the subjects and objects were randomly drawn from a corpus so there is no relation between the data points.
They are generally used in a span of French text within a codeswitched tweet where most tokens are in English; this explains why the tweets were tagged as written in English and retained in the corpus.
In the following we focus on longitudinal designs, which are more prevalent in research on language development, but many issues such as annotation layers or metadata are relevant for both corpus types.
CEA, on the other hand, provided the opportunity to ponder on the notion of error and introduce a higher degree of standardization at each level of the error analysis process: from error identification to error interpretation through error annotation and counting methods.
This should copy your text to the clipboard.
For example, in the spoken corpus of French from French-speaking Switzerland OFROM (see Chapter 5), the type/token ratio is 0.02, whereas in the French section of the children's literature corpus ByCoGliJe, it is equal to 0.04.
Additionally, some data models add grouping mechanisms to annotation graphs, often referred to as 'annotation layers', which can be used to lump together annotations that are somehow related.
Of course, adding this type of information can be quite time-consuming, so, in later sections, we'll explore ways of adding similar types of information automatically, as well as looking into ways in which we can exploit such annotated data even more extensively in order to search for and identify more complex linguistic patterns.
This involves manually annotating samples of corpus text as examples of how the new annotation categories should be assigned.
It is clear that corpus composition must have an influence on the identification of important lexical phrases.
These are essentially values of a variable we could call Type of Possessive Construction.
As we mention above, the applications we propose here represent just two of the many potential applications of bootstrapping in future corpus-based research.
However, instead of representing these overlaps with markup (as a TEI-conformant system would do (cf.
It means that we cannot reject the null hypothesis stating that there is no relationship between the article type and position.
Furthermore, instead of revealing interesting combinations of content words, you'll often find more grammatical constructions or combinations of function + content words, especially if the corpus is not very homogeneous, as in our case.
In this sense, all research questions are framed from a particular perspective by reference to a specific methodology (corpus linguistics).
Just as in the preceding sentence, I often used words that refer to meaning or understanding of linguistic rules in scare quotes, to indicate that, frequently, the notion of linguistic rules and knowledge in tagging may not really represent a proper kind of understanding that is/can be applied to morpho-syntactic annotation.
But because tweets are relatively short and are not part of any larger text, can they be considered texts themselves?
However, even though the modernday corpus linguist has access to individuals speaking many different regional and social varieties of English, it is a significant undertaking to create a spoken corpus that is balanced by region and social class.
In a corpus of spoken dialogues, for instance, it is necessary to include tags that identify who is speaking or which sections of speaker turns contain overlapping speech.
Finally, while we acknowledge that the creation of ad hoc semantic categories is useful for thematic content analysis, (continued) 6 Analysing Keyword Lists 125 particularly when the researchers are very well-versed in the content of their corpora, we wonder about the accompanying detriment that this brings, particularly in relation to replicability.
Despite its limitations, bootstrapping can provide a wealth of information about the distribution of a sample.
The body of the text mainly contains tags, which are destined to delimit text units such as paragraphs or even sentences.
The following exercise is designed to provide you with an introduction to this which is broken down into a series of steps that all successively allow you to deal with a particular XML-related or linguistic issue in creating a well-formed XML document.
It is to be stored as metadata in a header file.
As long as we are deriving all our collocation data from the same corpus, this will not make a difference, since the table total will always be the same.
For example, if the genre "Reports" is defined by text-internal features, those features would be very frequent within the resulting category.
Let us select a sample of 20 hits each for literal uses the singular and plural of flame(s) from the BNC (as mentioned above, Deignan's corpus is not accessible, so we must hope that the BNC is roughly comparable).
I've therefore had to restrict my discussion of relevant topics in corpus linguistics to what I consider the most essential ones for beginners.
Like the phase 2 work outlined above, there is an attempt to rely on information that emerges from the text ('trust the text', as Sinclair says), rather than on information that is presupposed.
Moreover, the texts in a corpus must be machine-readable so that they can be collated and investigated with the help of computers.
The only 'word' that was apparently not an issue in this exercise is very, but I said "apparently" above because of course the same issue as for this also applies to very, only that you may not have noticed it because no form of very with an initial capital letter occurs in the text.
The degrees of freedom is a complex concept, which is used when dealing with calculations based on a sample (corpus) rather than a population; in corpus linguistics, this is the case most of the time.
In addition, whereas the data used in this sample meta-analysis is purely fictional, in a real meta-analysis, if you were to discover after exhaustively searching for and collecting previous research that the number of "distant" L1 studies was similarly small (e.g., k = 4), the study would also provide evidence of a need for further research in this area.
Without metadata, we cannot test whether differences between any of these categories are meaningful.
For some initial practice, let's start by downloading a text from the Project Gutenberg website and taking a look at it.
This is not an uncommon scenario and yet it is extremely problematic because, while that corpus linguist has indeed found words with the same frequency, he has probably not even come close to do what he actually wanted to do.
There are always reasons why it may be difficult to get data published, and of course, this step also requires some resources if the corpus is to be presented in a well-structured and well-designed way.
If corpus methods are not sufficiently tailored to the research question, their usefulness is limited.
In earlier corpora, most corpus compilers used analog recorders and cassette tapes, since such recorders were small and unobtrusive and cassette tapes were inexpensive.
A very general precaution against this possibility is to make sure that the corpus (or our sample) is balanced with respect to all potentially confounding variables.
If you enter a specific word in the search box, the interface will allow you to calculate an MI score for the node and that particular collocate, while selecting from the 'POS LIST' options will allow you to look for colligations directly.
Throughout the book, many examples (case studies) of the application of corpus statistics are provided and standard reporting of statistics is shown.
Repeat the same process for the newspaper corpus.
For example, that demographers will have the answer to how to build a perfectly representative spoken corpus.
It is necessary to decide if a corpus should contain all types of written text samples or specific sets of text samples.
In general, it is appropriate to choose a base of normalization close to the size of the smallest corpus examined.
Different corpora follow different procedures here; for example, the Brown corpus follows the space-delimiter as we have done, counting aren't etc.
Considering the relationship among most sited publications and the salient academic research themes, it seems that the corpus linguistics has become a linchpin of certain academic disciplines.
There are many more and some strains of corpus linguistic research favour different measurements, either due to historical development of the sub-field or due to specific research goals.
Each sample was 2,000 words in length, enabling valid comparisons between the different registers in the corpus.
Due to the difficulty of collecting and transcribing spoken data, the question of the amount of data needed for creating a corpus is even more acute than for written data.
The corpus is Falko (see Sect.
But in this case too, there is no ideal size for a spoken corpus.
In Chapters 3 and 4, we will cover some of the specific directions we can explore in the corpus through software programs that allow for different types of analysis.
Corpus linguistics needs to "catch up" with regard to both of these groups.
It was by means of this type of comparison that the annotations offered for the Google Books corpus in section 7.2 were considered as suitable tagging and parsing systems.
We saw in (6.1) that in order to render the spoken text adequately, the transcriber needed to deviate from strict orthographic conventions.
For example, this type of information includes the date of a newspaper article, the place where a conversation was recorded or the characteristics of the speakers taking part in the dialogue.
Finally, some layers, such as 'constituent syntax', contain a complex subgraph: an NP node is attached to the token I, and a VP node is attached to know, and together they attach to the S node denoting the clause.
Numerical sorting is one of the most straightforward approaches to working with quantitative data of a corpus.
These databases are useful for quickly finding concordance examples but cannot be seriously considered as representative corpora (see Chapter 6).
For instance, for written texts, the header would include such information as the title of the text; the author(s); if published, where it was published; and so forth.
Relative frequencies of types are calculated by taking the raw frequency, dividing it by the number of tokens in the corpus overall, and multiplying by the normalisation factor (one thousand, one million or whatever).
I also repeated the analysis using the Corpus of Historical American English (COHA), which spans more or less the same period.
Corpus users are not always willing to have additional information tagged to texts.
However, as also discussed in Chapter 3, many if not most hypotheses in corpus linguistics have to be formulated in relative terms -like those introduced in Chapter 5.
When you look at the results, you should also be able to notice that, similar to the results we had for the Trains corpus, most of the high-frequency function words get sorted to the top, as well as first and second person pronouns, and fillers like erm, etc.
That is, in a difference type of test (e.g., One-Way ANOVA), this would show a significant difference between teacher and student presentations in terms of "ok" use.
For example, singing in the sentence She says she couldn't stop singing, even if she wanted to try is tagged in the British National Corpus by CLAWS 5 as VVG-NN1.
If the global null hypothesis cannot be rejected at a certain level of statistical significance α (by default, 0.05), no further splits are made.
For example, if one text is highly edited in style, and another one is highly casual, combining them together results in a loss of a lot of this information, and makes the combined text look somewhat average on both counts.
Choosing the right texts to be included in a corpus should also be the object of careful reflection, since any kind of analysis carried out on data that are not representative of the target genre (see section 6.2) could be largely invalid.
Take the following excerpts from the Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language (COLT).
Corpus builders have to consider the use of different scripts.
For a start, we mentioned that corpus creation is a long and complicated process.
Following this brief introduction, Section 2 explores the state of the art in collocation research, on the basis of which Section 3 presents a cross-linguistic study of the collocational behavior and semantic prosodies of a group of near synonyms in English and Chinese.
Very often, the authors of a corpus provide a bibliographic reference where they describe their corpus or the name of the team who compiled it.
For example, 56.18 percent of all possessive constructions in our sample are s-possessives and 43.82 percent are of -possessives; if there were a random relationship between type of construction and givenness of the modifier, we should find the same proportions for the 183 constructions with old modifiers, i.e.
All of the corpora also use the same search interface so that once you learn how to "ask" for information in one corpus, you can conduct searches in all of the available corpora.
Corpora usually have their own idiosyncratic study designs, including the number and age of children involved, the sampling regime, and the type of contexts in which recordings are taken, let alone the different conventions used for annotations.
Corpora are not defined in terms of specific properties of texts, so texts can be of any type and may exhibit a large range of diverse properties (cf.
Spoken language does not generally have the same type of planning and opportunities for revision that we find in many types of written language.
The difference is that the sum of squared distances is divided not by the total number of corpus parts but by the total number of corpus parts minus 1 (the reason for this is connected with the notion of 'degrees of freedom' explained in Section 6.3).
Instead, spoken samples in this corpus consist entirely of transcriptions of numerous radio and television programs that were created by a thirdparty.
All of these can be downloaded in text format.
Finally, the word list for the target corpus is reordered in terms of the keyness values of the words.
However, this will have the unfortunate consequence of skewing a lexical analysis of the corpus in which this utterance occurs, since all instances of the, police, and boat will be counted twice.
However, an additional value will be predicted for each lemma, and this value has to be added to the fixed coefficient.
Luckily, these are problems that have already been overcome to some extent by the advent of web-based interfaces to these mega corpora, which, even if they may not allow us to do everything we might want to do with such a corpus, already provide many facilities for investigating the data in relatively complex ways that will probably satisfy the needs of most researchers.
Finally, journalistic text translations are generally carried out by journalists, who are language professionals but not translation professionals.
COCA is not a published article; rather, it is a web-based corpus complied of a 520 million-word database from newspapers, magazines, fiction, and other academic text documents.
After that we use rchoose.files to define the base word list files (and later the Wikipedia entries), which we read in with the right encoding.
Run a search for the lemma of film, this time constraining the results to nouns, as, of course, film can also be a verb and we're not interested in this.
However, we do need to know more about all the others: "Type", "Decimals", "Label", "Values", "Missing", and "Measure".
The motivation was to prepare it for the linguistic analysis within the corpus.
It could simply never have been pronounced in such particular context, while it could exist in other language registers or have been mentioned by other speakers not included in the corpus.
As a related point, statistical significance has nothing to do with the quality of our data.
Or consider the DCIEM Map Task Corpus, which consists of unscripted dialogs in which one interlocutor describes a route on a map to the other after both interlocutors were subjected to 60 hours of sleep deprivation and one of three drug treatments -again, hardly a normal situation.
Conversely, the type nonattachment illustrates the prefixation of a bipartite ment-type, resulting in a right-branching structure.
Indeed, we may well observe different tendencies in another corpus of British English.
Client-server tools currently in wide use include SketchEngine, Wmatrix and CQPweb; some of these allow users to upload their own data to the corpus server, while others restrict users to a static set of available corpora.
In Section 3, I discuss the main principles of Open Corpus Linguistics, taking potential challenges and pitfalls into account.
For a fully automatic large-scale annotation of the syntax, speech acts, etc., you can also try my Dialogue Annotation and Research Tool (DART), which not only allows you to annotate hundreds of dialogues in this way within minutes, but also to post-edit/correct the annotations, as well as to carry out similar analysis operations to those we learnt how to perform in AntConc, including concordancing, n-gram analysis, etc.
Corpus evidence has also illuminated ELF processing issues: phraseological data indicate that L2 processing is not so different from L1 processing as to allow merely bottom-up processing, leading to inevitable errors, but also top-down processing of longer sequences, just like L1.
Let's recall Obama's speech cited above: this is an example of a text produced in (American) English.
Very often, the creators of new corpora solve the problem of representativeness by following the criteria used in existing reference corpora, such as the British National Corpus, a pioneer of the genre.
Each Brown family corpus thus consists of approximately one million words of written English (500 × 2,000).
In the corpus linguistics field, it is also known as lexical bundles, recurrent combinations or clusters.
Importantly, the appearance of a rightbranching type does not testify to the productivity of the suffix -ment, but rather to the productivity of the respective prefix.
In reviews of historical developments in corpus linguistics, reference is often made to the fact that concordances are not an invention of corpus linguistics, but have been used in the study of literature even before computers existed, for instance, to compile concordances of the Bible or of works of Shakespeare.
With written texts, if two line breaks are inserted between paragraphs while a text is being computerized, then paragraph tags can be inserted automatically at a later stage.
In order to avoid this problem, it would be necessary to collect a sample of texts, representative of the works of this period.
The measure lemma and the kind noun lemma were specified as varying-intercept random effects.
We will repeatedly refer back to Chapters 4 and 5 where different types of annotation were relevant.
Thus, less speech is needed to reach these necessary numbers of words for the particular corpus being created.
It is therefore necessary to prepare a sample of the population of a more modest size, to whom it might be possible to ask such a question.
The first relates to the collocation-via-significance approach.
What is offered instead are detailed descriptions of a relatively small selection of methods which are likely to be of most use to corpus linguists, where usefulness is judged on criteria of intuitive accessibility, theoretically and empirically demonstrated effectiveness, and availability of software implementations for practical application.
The spoken part of the Quirk Corpus was later computerized at Lund University under the direction of Jan Svartvik.
In most cases, corpus designers should therefore consciously select texts on a range of topics.
This corpus contains 5,800 sentence pairs.
In order to understand the difficulties of corpus balancing, we will give an example.
The bad news for Windows users is that, with R for Windows at least, it is often not as straightforward to handle Unicode as it is with R for MacOS X or R for Linux, which is mainly due to the fact that Mac OS X and Linux are UTF-8 operating systems so they play well with input files that have the same encoding, which is one of many reasons (see Section 3.8.2 for another one) why I recommend doing corpus processing with R on a Linux machine (and it takes very little time to install a long-term support version of, for instance, Kubuntu or Linux Mint on a desktop computer).
The Mann-Whitney U test, which takes individual variation into account performed considerably better with type I error rate (as expected) around 5%.
Note that the balance should consider not only the number of texts in each sub-corpus but should also consider the word count of the sub-corpora.
In this case, you are not looking for the kinds of n-grams that may be emerging in that corpus; instead, you are just looking for a pre-defined sequence of words (that may, or may not, have been extracted from a previous corpus).
Chapter 3 included a discussion of counterexamples and their place in a scientific framework for corpus linguistics.
While grammatical and functional information can be found often even in a small corpus, it is not the only thing linguists want to study.
This chapter highlights genre categorizations as a pitfall at the intersection of corpus linguistics and literature and problematizes the use of the genre category tag from the perspectives afforded by both fields.
When present, a publication bias (also referred to as "the file drawer problem") in favor of larger effects may be observed in a given sample of studies, leading to an inflated overall effect.
Another group of researchers, possibly novices in the discipline, cited general references to corpus linguistics, such as Introduction to Corpus Linguistics, Corpora in Applied Linguistics, and Foundations of Statistical Natural Language.
Put differently, if we go through the occurrences of -icle in the BNC item by item, the probability that the next item instantiating this suffix will be a type we have not seen before is 0.15 percent, so we will encounter a new type on average once 9 Morphology every 670 words.
In the reading process patterns in the text determine which area of background knowledge or previous experience are relevant to the creation of meaning.
She built a small but balanced corpus of randomly selected 30 class sessions from multiple corpora (MICASE, BASE, and others) where male and female instructors and levels of instruction (undergraduate, graduate) were both represented.
Speech corpora are based on spoken language but necessitate detailed annotation including not only written transcription but transcription in phonetic alphabets and careful connections with the time course of speaking.
Note that while the annotation as such seems simplistic, the operationalisation of underlying categories is particularly complex in this area.
To help with this research collocation is used.
For speech samples recorded from television or radio, additional information was written down, such as what station the recording was made from, where the station is located, and who should be contacted to obtain written permission to use the sample.
This type of regression has subtypes such as logistic or multinomial and this distinction has to do with the distribution of the data and the type of DV, whether it is numeric or 2-way categorical or 2+-way categorical among other possibilities.
The exploration can be done in different levels: all corpus or by user type (news agencies or individuals).
Nevertheless, semantic tags can be extremely useful, especially for detecting patterns in a corpus that affect groups of semantically-related words which are individually very rare.
This form of standard deviation (SD p or σ [sigma]) differs slightly from the sample standard deviation (see below).
If these layers are generated by separate automatic or manual annotation tools, then such conflicts are in fact likely to occur over the course of the corpus.
In general, the investigation is top-down, in the sense that a question is asked of the corpus and means devised to find the answer to the question.
The second independent variable is the type of newspaper, which is a categorical variable, since it falls into three distinct categories, namely The Times, the Daily Telegraph, and the Guardian.
COCA, on the other hand, currently has more than 180,000 texts and the 400-million-word COHA historical corpus has more than 100,000 texts.
There is a range of possible considerations to take in deciding about sampling procedures for a corpus, one of which concerns to what extent to organize the overall design around text production or text reception.
It expresses the probability of the sample data being observed if the null hypothesis were true in the population.
First of all, each text was assigned a number that designated a specific genre in the corpus in which the sample would be potentially included.
Most corpus tools require plain text versions with optional XML encoding, so where material is sourced in another form, some format conversions will be in order.
In corpus linguistics, we are essentially interested in how various structures (sounds, words, constructions) are used in particular contexts characterised by internal and external features; how possible variation in usage and choices between alternative structures (the so-called variants of a variable) can be correlated with such features, and how the use of particular forms can then be explained in terms of specific (qualitative) mechanisms relating to such features (see 4.
The independent variables in our annotation layer are detailed in the following.
The grammatical word tier forms the basis for all further annotation, that is, morphological glossing, GRAID and RefIND which are all successively symbolically associated.
Mastering these terms will make reading of the rest of the book, and many papers in corpus linguistics, much easier.
The same applies to artificial corpora of experimentally elicited texts: even where participants produce texts narrating the exact same content under the same experimental conditions, as with the Pear Film experiment, it is vital for the corpus to cover speakers with different demographic features, as the corpora are meant to represent the behavioural reaction to the stimulus characteristic of the language community as a whole.
When we call them 4-grams, it does not matter how often they occur in a corpus; they are still called 4-grams.
Since most of the words in the non-specialized lexicon are polysemic, this annotation is essential.
The concordancer is an excellent way of locating examples of such prosodic clash.
Automatic corpus parsing, however, has proved a more difficult nut to crack than POS-tagging.
An important notion in corpus linguistics is that of context.
Any document that purely contains text (plus potentially some form of markup, see Chapter 11), is generally referred to as a plain-text document and should be readable (and writable) with any basic text editor (see Section 4.2.1 for a more in-depth discussion of these).
Here, it may be a bit misleading at first that you don't use COMPARE, but this would simply switch us to the other corpus.
What we did instead was to assign each article -each text -a value on each of the identified dimensions.
Many corpus studies take a similar approach in looking at words or domains in the lexicon and comparing uses.
For instance, a factor drastically lowering the representativeness of written corpora is the fact that we often do not know anything about specific circumstances of text production and editing before the written texts were published.
Online you can find websites that help you practice your regular expressions on sample data.
It is a line plot that shows positions of all tokens of a vector on the x-axis (as in Section 5.1.2) and all type frequencies on the y-axis; in other words, each point's y-coordinate divided by each point's x-coordinate provides the point's type token ratio.
POS=NOUN); in some complex architectures, annotations can potentially include more complex data types, such as hierarchical feature structures, in which annotations can contain not only simple values, but also further nested annotations (see ISO 24612 for a standardized representation for such structures in corpus markup).
The function str() can be used to see what type of data has been loaded: str(cl.order).
For example, bus and ride co-occur in the corpus, as do ride and hour, and thirty and hour.
For a given lexical item, our method produces computational representations of its occurrences in the corpus and splits them into groups based on semantic similarity, prioritizing those that are expected to reflect the influence of French.
Metadata is also relevant to what kind of research we can do with a given corpus.
P is expressed as Fc NÀF n and E as P F n S, where F n and F c are the frequency counts of the node and collocate while N and S stand for the size of the corpus (i.e.
The standard deviations are calculated according to equation (2.11) from Chapter 2 (standard deviation sample).
The diary examples were extracted from the LiveJournal corpus, developed by Dirk Speelman (University of Leuven).
As the texts get longer, more and more of the features of interest start appearing in every text.
While spelling variation is a problem in advanced corpus linguistic analyses using historical material (e.g.
The International Corpus of English in particular represents ten varieties of spoken English (e.g.
For each type, determine whether there is a preference for the "by phrase".
The aim of this chapter is to reflect on some of the pitfalls involved in using the British Library Newspapers database as a corpus and consider some ways in which they can be avoided.
Many people would prefer to consider newspaper data not corpora, but text archives.
However, in light of the above discussion of representativeness, there is little reason to believe that any of these corpora, or the many others that fall somewhere between BROWN and ICE, even come close to approximating a random sample of (a given variety of) English in terms of the text categories they contain and the proportions with which they are represented.
With parametric tests, like the Two-Way ANOVA, we can generalize to the population that the sample was drawn from.
A corpus can also contain elicited texts, including even lists of elicited sentences, as long as all contextual information is preserved.
State your alternative hypothesis: H 1 -There is a relationship between type of article use and clause position.
To answer the question, a representative sample of Tyneside speech is collected and relevant data is abstracted from it.
When the text of a file is not displayed correctly in AntConc, the encoding used can be changed to make it match the file's encoding, for example, the ISO 8859-1 format (Latin.1).
Anyone who decides to become involved in collocation research (or some of the large-scale lexical research areas described in the next chapter), should get acquainted at least with the simple options of automatizing statistical testing offered by spreadsheet applications.
This issue prevents the inclusion of recently published texts in a corpus that have not yet fallen into the public domain.
Nevertheless, it is not often the case that the findings of a meta-analysis will provide conclusive answers to questions of interest, particularly in a young field such as corpus 27 Meta-analyzing Corpus Linguistic Research 679 linguistics.
The question of 'what is language like' is one that Corpus Linguistics seeks to answer.
We argue in this chapter that bootstrapping is underused relative to its potential in corpus linguistics, and that quantitative corpus linguists would do well to add this tool to their repertoire.
Overall the authors were able to take advantage of a well-annotated corpus and apply a fitting quantitative analysis to show that factors from both processing and conversational norms interact and have an effect on conversational interactions.
As a broad sample of the English language in general, it is suited to many different research aims.
It is applied to a corpus text which has already been annotated and translated, as required.
In particular, the goal of this analysis is to compare not contraction across years, genders, and regions in the WARD corpus, which was introduced earlier in this chapter.
If you are using any tagged corpus, it is good to look through a portion of the actual tagged data before you start your searches so that you can adapt your search to what is really available in the corpus, not just what you expect or hope to be available.
The shift of focus from morphosyntax to lexis and discourse has proved to be particularly fruitful for the analysis of advanced interlanguage.
This might eventually become a problem with a corpus, including thousands of different files.
One striking feature is that the corpus comes with various predefined subcorpora, varying in size or in the period that is represented, so as to meet different research needs.
As we will later explore in the case studies, when studying children with atypical development, it may be advisable to analyze a corpus of children with typical development (or suffering from a different pathology which does not involve the same linguistic deficits) in parallel, so as to favor the comparison between different linguistic productions in similar contexts.
Thus, it is tremendously helpful if a corpus is extensible, that is, existing annotations can be amended or improved and new ones can be added, both by the original creators and by people who reuse the data.
Make sure to provide examples from the corpus to support your analysis of their meanings.
The importance of this information depends on the questions that the corpus is expected to answer.
Better yet, they should invest a few weeks (or, in the worst case, months) to learn a scripting language like Perl, Python or R (the latter being a combination of statistical software and programming environment that is ideal for almost any task that we are likely to come across as corpus linguists).
In this way, we can see how corpus linguistics can provide translators with tools that may help them adapt their translation choices on the basis of a better identification of the recurrent linguistic properties at work in a text.
Despite its modest size, this corpus makes it possible to study the specificities of the journalistic style when applied to a particular field.
For each status update or post that comes through, they will have accompanying metadata that show the gender, general age range, and approximate geographical location of the author.
These considerations are likely to explain why the Sakapultek corpus is among the very few corpora that show the postulated discourse-ergative pattern.
They stress the significance of "knowing one's data" for researchers dealing with vast corpora, emphasizing collaboration with historians, and systematic text examination for qualitative analyses and data interpretation.
Thus, each of these vectors needs to have as many empty elements as there are files in corpus.files.
Daily use of digital electronic information technology by many millions of people worldwide in their professional and personal lives has generated and continues to generate truly vast amounts of electronic speech and text, and abstraction of information from all but a tiny part of it by direct inspection is an intractable task not only for individuals but also in government and commerce -what, for example, are the prospects for finding a specific item of information by reading sequentially through the huge number of documents currently available on the World Wide Web?
Furthermore, journals that first ranked on the list after the early or late 2000s and remained dominant in corpus linguistics until now were English for Specific Purposes, TESOL Quarterly, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, and Cognitive Linguistics.
As was noted in Chapter 3, a corpus that is lexically tagged contains part-of-speech information for each word in the corpus.
Our case studies cover three of the five main methods in the corpus linguistic methodology: frequency lists, key words, and collocations.
Consequently, we suggest that it would be prudent to think about the principle of "knowing one's data" from a new perspective: as the sheer size of the modern mega-corpora prevents scholars from engaging with either all or the majority of the original source texts in as much detail as in the early days of historical corpus linguistics, they should strive for an intimate understanding of the historical corpora as mediators of the original texts.
While this seems like a very high accuracy rate, in a large corpus, the remaining 3 percent of words with multiple tags can constitute a very sizable number of words.
Even though the basics of computerizing spoken and written data are the same, depending on the type of data (speech or written), the methods used for computerizing differ.
While there are many different corpora available (see a selection at the end of the book), as an example, we will use the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), which is a publicly available collection of over 1 billion words of text of American English (freely available at www.english-corpora.org/coca/), to investigate the use of two words: equal and identical.
The evidence suggests that corpus work is now ready to expand beyond the university ESP class, where it has largely been used to date, into mainstream second and foreign language learning -where, of course, its effects can continue to be investigated and the conditions of its success elaborated.
In the second type of approach, we use the original pre-trained LLM (i.e.
Most of them rely on corpus linguistic methodology, but a few, mainly on the literary side of studies, focus on individual texts or passages and their interpretations.
The study also demonstrates that the distribution of particular metaphorical expressions across varieties, which can easily be determined in corpora that contain the relevant metadata, may shed light on the function of those expressions (and of metaphor in general).
However, the focus on words is also due to the fact that the results of corpus linguistic research quickly showed that words (individually and in groups) are more interesting and show a more complex behavior than traditional, grammarfocused theories of language assumed.
Examples include translations from EU Parliament debates into the 23 languages of the European Union, or the Canadian Hansard corpus, containing Canadian Parliament debates in English and French.
Similar to quote tweets, keeping repeated tweets would inflate the content of the corpus and it would not be representative.
To be interpreted meaningfully, then, it must therefore nearly always be combined with some form of qualitative analysis -that is, an analysis that involves the linguist interacting with the actual discourse within the corpus and its structure and/or meaning.
However, a second domain in which (G)LMM is extremely useful is one that characterises the vast majority of corpus-linguistic studies and that is routinely ignored (and that pertains to most of my own earlier work, too): random effects can be not just crossed but also 'nested' across multiple levels (hence 'multi-level analysis').
Original text corpora are thus an option where the phenomenon of interest can be considered ubiquitous enough to be represented sufficiently in the corpus (cf.
Conversely, since poems are a very short genre and more marginal in terms of the amount of texts published, a possible decision would be to limit the share of poems to a smaller percentage of the corpus, for example, to limit poetry to 50,000 words.
Of course, the issue of genre balance also affects smaller diachronic corpora like the Helsinki Corpus, because some genres may disappear and new ones appear over time, and compromises must be made in the compilation process in terms of representativeness vs. diachronic comparability.
For instance, in the Littéracie avancée corpus described above, a search for the French word avis (opinion) by means of a concordancer indicates that the students have used this word 61 times.
Obviously there are some problems with this approach due to the format of the data that will be retrieved, which often includes other types of information apart from the main text, but we'll deal with these issues only partially now, and explore the remaining options a little later.
A final issue has received very little attention in corpus-driven studies of phraseology: the extent to which specific lists of lexical phrases are reliable (i.e.
It is not suitable as a final characterization of corpus linguistics yet, as the phrase "distribution of linguistic phenomena" is still somewhat vague.
For instance, the treatment of the topic of 'Religion' (D) in the Brown Corpus is generally of a more scholarly or esoteric nature, whereas the category 'Religious Broadcast' (E) in the SEC purely consists of religious services, rather than scholarly discussions of religious issues, and category K (General Fiction) in the Brown Corpus consists of fiction texts treated as texts to be read, whereas 'Fiction' (G) in the SEC is perhaps unusual in the sense that it covers written materials that are simply presented as read aloud, rather like modern-day audio books.
Before we can take any detailed look at the technical aspects of such an advanced enrichment process and the best type(s) of format for this, though, we still need to deal with a few terminological distinctions, and try to understand the historical developments and motivation underlying the different formats.
Furthermore, the annotation itself is accompanied by a hermeneutic dimension, which reflects the annotators' point of view about the text.
More specifically, a bi-directional parallel corpus should be used, since the equivalences are often variable depending on the direction of translation.
My aim here is to illustrate this argument by identifying and describing issues that are specific to the British Library Newspapers database, an archive that has clearly not been put together with corpus linguistic research designs in mind, presenting some possible solutions to them, and reflecting on the overall feasibility of these solutions.
Some international initiatives such as CLARIN in Europe have the aim of overcoming this challenge by providing an infrastructure for corpus users that includes easy-to-use standardised tools.
In general, the repertoire of corpus-linguistic studies is fairly broad from corpus-based but mainly qualitative studies to advanced statistical methods and computer programs specially designed for the research question under investigation.
But, before we do, we would like to briefly describe what we mean by a corpus.
In addition, sample corpus analyses are included to illustrate the many theoretical and practical applications that linguistic corpora have.
A "machine-readable corpus" is a corpus that has been encoded in a digital format.
This point can be illustrated by considering two different content words, each occurring 42 times (per 100,000 words) in the corpus of Donald Trump's campaign speeches: military (n.), and Virginia (n.).
We have emphasized that frequency is not the only indicator of the prevalence of a word in a corpus and that its dispersion across the different portions of the corpus is also very important.
Third, another similar set of tools is employed in the field of digital humanities for text mining of language properties in order to answer traditional humanities research questions and the formation of new research questions that are more difficult to answer with small-scale manual text analysis.
At the same time, the high frequency of punctuation tokens will affect the calculations of relative and normed reported frequencies throughout the whole corpus, which will again have an effect on the calculations for collocations, too.
Once a draft version of a text contains "metadata" and "textual markup", it can then be placed into a "lexical (pending proofreading)" directory to indicate that the text will be ready for use as a lexical version of the corpus once it has been proofread.
The current standard method for adding tags to a corpus is by means of XML (the eXtensible Markup Language).
To do this, simply type the initial phrase into an empty document and then search for (rarely) (have) and replace this by \2 \1, making sure that the option for regex replacements is switched on.
When studying words, we will normally be interested in how often they are used under a particular condition, so it is their token frequency that is relevant to us; but we could imagine designs where we are mainly interested in whether a word occurs at all, in which case all that is relevant is whether its type frequency is one or zero.
In other words, the potential of finding unwanted or irrelevant items may in some cases vary between different sections of the corpus.
It simply assures that individuals whose speech will be included in the corpus have had exposure to English over a significant period.
It does not pose particular problems for corpus-based morphology, which studies structures smaller than the word.
This corpus can be downloaded from the Ortolang platform.
To start out, we clarify briefly what we mean by the terms grammar, grammatical change, and corpus-based analyses.
The type of English used in Britain or the United States also varies from region to region or among people from different socio-economic classes.
The corpus is richly annotated, e.g.
For example, the word Mme in line 94 is an abbreviation, indicated in the corpus by the sequence \0 preceding it.
Use your browser's find functionality to look for the Uppsala Student English corpus (USE) under the 'Corpora' tab, then click on the id (2457) on the left.
Metaphorically, we can imagine this as a 'magnetic field' around the node that attracts particular collocates like a magnet attracts metal objects.
In practical terms, this means that a text originally written in, say, Slovenian or Dutch is first translated into English.
Consequently, before any transcription is undertaken, it is important to decide just how much that exists in a spoken text one wishes to include in a transcription of it.
Considering the fashionableness of the concept of samurai in popular culture today, it is quite possible that the occurrences of the word in named entities would show changing trends in diachronic corpora, and the proportions of hits of the word in names as opposed to common noun uses vary from one period to another.
In order for the comparison to be valid, however, the two sets ((sub-)corpus A and (sub-)corpus B) need to be maximally comparable with regard to all or most factors, except for the one being contrasted.
Both ways of course require the text to be suitably cleaned, normalised, and tokenised into words in the first place, which is at least part of the reason why I placed such a lot of emphasis on cleaning up our data in earlier sections of this book.
The first was to generate new dimensions from a corpus of articles from a single academic journal (Global Environmental Change).
As we saw in Chapter 5, most concordancers (like AntConc) only read files in text format, which can include texts tagged in XML format.
Unlike the corpus-driven approaches illustrated in this book, more advanced corpus-driven register studies have identified co-occurring linguistic features that have emerged through corpus analyses.
In those concerned with the structure of the language faculty, and in generative linguistics more specifically, the role of text is less obvious but no less fundamental: native speaker grammaticality judgment has historically been used as the basis for hypothesis generation and confirmation instead of evidence derived from corpora, but such judgment is based on example sentences generated by the researcher's language faculty, not on direct access to the language faculty within the human cognitive system itself, and therefore on text in the above sense.
For example, if you type in the word baby, you will see that it occurs over 60,000 times in the COCA corpus.
However, to discuss possible pitfalls associated with research at the interface of Digital Humanities and corpus linguistics, it is necessary to briefly review some basic assumptions associated with these respective areas of study.
In this paper, a look will be taken at the area of corpus linguistics.
I uncovered some limitations of the current crop of computational tools and methods and reflected on whether corpus linguistics could be said to be becoming tool-driven.
Using this encoding scheme, a PDV-level transcription of any given speaker interview audio file is a sequence of fourdigit codes, and a State-level transcription is a sequence of five-digit codes.
For example, we can calculate the mean rate of occurrence for nouns in a single corpus sample of size n. However, if this sample is biased in some way, as most samples are, then our estimated rate of occurrence (i.e.
However, we cannot take for granted that this method yields a balanced sampling, especially in the case of a small corpus.
In this chapter, we focus on how to write the 'Methods' and 'Results' sections of a quantitative corpus linguistic paper since the 'Introduction' and 'Discussion' sections are so phenomenon-dependent that, apart from the general guidelines above, they defy easy discipline-specific characterization.
As a matter of fact, issues related to multilingual annotation (e.g.
Let us look at a specific example, the English ditransitive construction, and let us assume that we have an untagged and unparsed corpus.
A major remaining challenge is the lack of sufficiently rich corpora from diverse languages that contain the relevant primary data as well as metadata.
This tool makes it possible to perform a time-aligned annotation with audio or video files, to insert metadata and to have access to the results of the annotation in different formats.
As we saw in the preceding chapter, corpora fell out of favor just as linguistics grew into an academic discipline in its own right and as a result, corpus-based studies of language were relegated to the margins of the field.
This can be extremely useful, for instance, when you know where in a line of annotation, say, the three-character identifier of a speaker is located (as may be the case in CHAT files from the CHILDES database) or when you want to access the line numbers in some version of the Brown corpus, which are always the first eight characters of each line, etc.
If necessary, this annotation can be corrected manually.
The conversion of a corpus into a database of syntactic tree structures or a treebank remains a problematic and laborious task, which is associated with error or failure rates far greater than those associated with taggers.
Similarity of lexis in web-based GloWbE and genres in COCA and BNC 2.1.
The names of decades (such as 1960s or sixties) occur too infrequently with dawn of in this corpus to say anything useful about them, but the names of centuries are frequent enough for a differential collexeme analysis.
Because corpora are fairly diverse in size, structure, and composition, the TEI provides a general definition of a corpus.
Other times, however, we refer to a word not to designate the total number of character strings, but the number of different words that a corpus contains.
The extension of the corpus-linguistic paradigm to past stages of the English language has increased the attention given to sampling issues in the above regard.
Complications may also arise if the character set is not directly supported by the computer the corpus is viewed on.
With mixed-effects models, it is important to report the type of mixed-effects model used as well as the details of the model.
This means that their token frequency can reflect situations that are both quantitatively and qualitatively very different.
In the simplest case, such as in a novel, this may just involve breaking the text into chapters and labelling them Chapter1, Chapter 2, Chapter 3, etc., with a slightly 'more advanced' situation being that the individual chapters may also be given a title.
These are, roughly speaking, the words most typical for the collocational framework: when we encounter the framework (in a corpus or in real life), these are the words that are most probable to fill the slot between a and of.
This will return you to the basic single-corpus COCA interface.
There are several projects gathering very large corpora on a broader range of web-accessible text.
As with XML, in CSS slight mistakes in the syntax may cause errors, so if the display you get doesn't seem to reflect our properties, you need to check your style sheet for errors.
The right panel is a similar plot but it bins the words in the corpus (here into ten equally large parts), and again we can see that there are a lot of occurrences of "Perl" in the last 10 percent slice of the corpus.
This statistical noise explains why the models' coefficients do not correspond exactly to the number of milliseconds that we specified for each type of example.
These techniques include frequency profiling: listing all of the words (types) in the corpus and how frequently they occur, and concordancing: listing each occurrence of a word (token) in a corpus along with the surrounding context.
This latter option was used to gather speech in the demographic component of the British National Corpus (BNC).
A worthy research project has a number of different components, including providing a motivation of the significance of the topic, a clear description of the corpus and the methods used in the study, presentation of results, a discussion of the results, and a conclusion that provides a summary and "takeaway message" of the research.
In a list of the ten most frequent words of a large English corpus, all of the words will be function words.
Finally, an annotation of the grammatical categories associated with each word requires establishing a list of these categories.
Had lengthier samples been used, the style of a particular author or periodical, for instance, would have been over-represented in the corpus and thus have potentially skewed the results of studies done on the corpus.
By bias we mean a systematic but often hidden deviation of the sample from the population.
Once the tag set has been defined, the corpus processing phase can begin.
Faced with these results, we might ask, first, how they relate to two simpler tests of Schmid's hypothesis -namely two bivariate designs separately testing (a) the relationship between Aktionsart and Complementation, (b) the relationship between Aktionsart and Matrix Verb and (c) the relationship between Matrix Verb and Complementation Type.
This is very valuable information to estimate the quantity and type of input a child is exposed to.
Further exclusion criteria are needed for the purposes of a meta-analysis of this type; in particular, only experimental or quasi-experimental studies with a pre/post-test or a treatment/control group design, or both, can provide appropriate comparative data.
The more specific concern of corpus linguistics is to account for these decisions by systematically investigating related variants and conditions on their choice.
How does the language type affect which words are included in the most frequent lists?
A corpus with more or longer texts will allow more words in them.
But let us assume, for the moment, that the cross-section of published material read by the editors of Merriam Webster's dictionary counts as a linguistic corpus.
This made accurate timing impossible, unless we were to take a more representative sample and check all the document images manually, which would have been a very labour-intensive task.
If we then want to use these lists to profile lexis in other texts or corpora, the same procedure is necessary for each new text.
For example, if the sampling frame for a corpus of French spoken in Switzerland includes different criteria such as gender, age, socio-economic level or place of residence, an equivalent number of samples should be chosen to match each selected criterion.
Until the 1980s, a corpus of a million words was considered to be a very large corpus.
This practicality consideration may lead to creating a corpus that overrepresents easily obtainable texts.
Following the online tutorial on YouTube referenced above, identify the press reports sub-corpus in both the American and the British collections (AmE06_PressRep and BE-06_PressRep) and feed them into the tool.
In general, when selecting individuals whose texts will be included in a corpus, it is important to consider the implications that their gender, age, and level of education will have on the ultimate composition of the corpus.
As described in the previous section, the computational n-grams method appears under various guises in corpus linguistics.
As already mentioned, corpus linguistics has been criticized in relation to its suitability for the study of speech acts.
Dynamic corpora grow over time as more and more texts are included (monitor corpora are a type of dynamic corpus).
For the results of a binary logistic regression, the write-up should provide goodness-of-fit statistics such as the concordance index C or Nagelkerke's R 2 (cf.
XML, however, is much more versatile than HTML because it was designed to be extensible by the user in providing the ability to completely define one's own tags.
The text is clearly about fish in the two rivers.
Linguistic annotation varies from corpus to corpus as well.
This value is known as the median -a value that splits a sample or population into a higher and a lower portion of equal sizes.
By resorting to many different speakers and including them in reference corpora of speakers coming from different geographical areas, corpus linguistics makes it possible to respond to this problem in a much more satisfactory way.
The top three interrogative words beginning a wh-embedded inversion are the same (in the same rank order) for both corpora: what (ELFA: 66% of all WH-embedded inversions, MICASE: 59%), how (ELFA: 15%, MICASE: 22%), and why (ELFA: 7%, MICASE: 10%), and for both speaker groups it is the cliticized what's that is especially closely associated with embedded inversions in the WH-type (what + BE is the most common wh-word + predicate combination in these embedded inversions, and in ELFA 22.6% of these are cliticized, in MICASE 29%).
For example, for annotating speech acts in a corpus, a tag like question could be interpreted very differently depending on the annotators, if no explanation is added.
This allows corpus linguistic methods to be used in uncovering at least some properties of that culture.
The second function is that metadata allows us to isolate and compare different sections of a corpus.
To align the data, check to see which types in the columns type and type_n are identical, and transfer the corresponding values from the rightmost freq_n column to the one on the left.
The latter term is to be understood here in a broad and non-technical sense, meaning simply that in order for a range of texts to form a corpus they need to be compiled in some form and accessible in some way.
This definition of the accuracy of an annotation is often subdivided into two separate criteria.
Unfortunately, though, as useful as AntConc is for most purposes, since it's a stream-based concordancer it'll ignore all line breaks and match more than we want to see in our concordance, so using it here is not an option.
Look at the information presented on the page, especially about availability, and then download the .zip archive of the corpus from the link provided there.
Using the LL test, textual analysis can be done effectively with much smaller amounts of text than is necessary for statistical measures which assume normal distributions.
Because the London-Lund Corpus has been prosodically transcribed, it can be used to study various features of British English intonation patterns, such as the relationship between grammar and intonation in English.
The following discussion is based on the full data from the fiction subcorpus and a subsample of the newspaper corpus that was arrived at by deleting every second, then every third and finally every 192nd example, ensuring that the hits in the sample are spread through the entire newspaper subcorpus.
Make sure that your analysis scripts are extensively commented (formats like R Markdown or Jupyter Notebooks invite extensive comments, but plain text scripts can also be used, of course).
It contains some of the oldest French texts from 950 up to the present-day and, with currently about 300 million words of text, it decidedly qualifies as a large corpus.
For example, a corpus that is annotated into grammatical categories with the aim of being used as a reference tool for beginner language learners will have to use a simplified categorization of grammatical categories.
Intuitions remain in the explanations analysts bring to the data that are collected, making a corpus approach a unique combination of empirical analysis, deduction, and human sensitivity.
There may be more than one mode in a given sample.
In some areas, like historical discourse pragmatics, progress has been considerable, but it has also been noticed that all branches of historical pragmatics do not lend themselves easily to corpus studies.
For this reason, rich annotation is best seen only as a means to facilitate querying a corpus.
In addition, we will suggest that you access other corpora to carry out further projects in this area, for example, the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE).
In spite of the challenges that cross-disciplinary research poses, maybe now is a particularly good time for corpus stylistics?
If you need to convert pdf files to a text format, the best tool to use is another free program by Laurence Anthony, and it is called AntFileConverter: www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antfileconverter/.
Some common types of extralinguistic annotation include semantic annotation, anaphoric annotation, discourse annotation, etymological annotation, rhetoric annotation, and ethnographic annotation.
As we're not interested in lemmas at the moment, turn off the 'Lemma Word Forms(s)' option under 'Tool Preferences→Word List'.
Finally, it should be noted that GraphColl has a concordance feature built-in so that users can use the interface to more closely examine specific collocations in context.
At first, this will seem like a somewhat abrupt shift from the topics and phenomena we have discussed so far -it may not even be immediately obvious how they fit into the definition of corpus linguistics as "the investigation of linguistic research questions that have been framed in terms of the conditional distribution of linguistic phenomena in a linguistic corpus", which was presented at the end of Chapter 2.
The position could be oversimplified as being one that is interested in the purpose and form of a text, and often focused on the intersection between the two.
But this is not true for all written text, for example, text messages may be formulated fairly quickly and without much planning.
The corpus approach also helped see multiple real interactions (at least from the side of the health professionals) to assess the patterns in this institutional setting.
When a researcher taking part in corpus-based research is recognized, his/her names are employed as key terms to deal for research offspring in basic scholastic data.
First of all, they should be linked to the corpus text data and their metadata so that corpus users can evaluate how annotators arrived at their annotation decisions; at the same time the annotations are ideally extractable in order to be analysed outside the corpus infrastructure itself, for example, by programmes for statistical analysis.
A small sample is more likely to be affected by chance and we may see spurious results.
Video recordings also allow us to document sign languages; see Chapter 4.3 for some details on their corpus-based investigation.
For instance, in a shallowly-parsed corpus, one might search for instances of V NP NP with the goal of retrieving ditransitive constructions such as He gave him a book, but that search might also return instances of object complementation such as He called him a liar, which would have to be filtered out.
Let us look at five examples of frequently used corpus linguistic operationalizations that demonstrate various aspects of the issues sketched out above.
Other examples include the Corpus of Professional Spoken American English (press conferences; faculty meetings and committee meetings related to national tests) and COLT (Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language).
A multiple linear regression analysis can determine whether there are factors that allow us to predict whether a given text will have a relatively high TTR value or a relatively low one.
Therefore, it is unrealistic to expect that ethnographic information will be available for every writer and speaker in a corpus.
One type of development addresses this restriction by proposing more flexible lattice structures which can better represent the input topology -cf.
Both words occur five times in the corpus, i.e.
When working with corpora based on language documentations, corpus linguists need to work with what they have, and this may often require flexibility.
The Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English, for instance, contains not only an exact transcription of the text of a spoken conversation (including hesitations, repetitions, partially uttered words, and so forth) but also annotation marking various features of intonation in the text, such as tone unit boundaries, pauses, and pitch contours.
In this section, we will discuss a number of heuristic techniques that can be used to interrogate the syntagmatic-paradigmatic organization across the whole lexicogrammatical continuum, and we will illustrate their potential relevance to diachronic corpus linguistics.
Many of these may not be considered stop words in a general sense, and would therefore not be applicable to other types of files/domain, but are highly particular to this specific type of dialogue.
Thus, for certain research questions relating to rare or hardly observable phenomena in a corpus, it might be advisable to complement research with another empirical method, namely with the experimental method.
Besides, it is also necessary to determine which metadata will be associated with each corpus sample.
It is sometimes supposed that corpus linguists are content "merely" to "describe" what is found in a corpus, for example by describing the structures found and their frequencies, rather than to show how their findings advance understanding in terms of some theoretical framework(s) of how grammar works.
There are a number of reasons why a sample might be biased.
While the configuration of abhorment does occur more often than expected in the third corpus period (o = 75, e = 52.4), this difference is not large enough to be statistically significant, so that the configuration of abhorment is not a type.
Next, place the cursor in the first empty cell in the rel_g column, 3 across from the word about, type =, then click in the cell below freq_g that contains the frequency for this word, type /, and click on the number that contains the total for the tokens in the general corpus (Excel), or type n_general (Calc), then press the enter key.
A concept that is intrinsically related to representativeness is balance, which has to do with the proportions of the different samples included in the corpus.
Ironically, the corpus was created around the time when generative grammar completely changed the shape of linguistics.
As they begin doing analyses of corpora they find themselves practising their linguistic tradition in the realm of numbers, the discipline of statistics, which many corpus linguists find foreign and intimidating.
In the latter case, you won't need to re-run the concordance, but can simply click anywhere in the hits to remove all selections, although you'll still need to select the ones you want again.
This figure represents the first 2,000 words in any given text, plus the number of words to complete a sentence started so that the text snippets included contain all complete sentences.
Although this lemma occurs in a majority of corpus parts (Range 10) it has a very low Juilland's D (0.2).
Finally, although inserting "structural" markup into a text is separate from the process of actually computerizing the text, there are many instances where markup can be inserted while texts are being computerized.
The particular information collected will very much depend on the kind of corpus being created and the variables that future users of the corpus will want to investigate.
In including short samples from many different texts, corpus compilers are assuming that it is better to include more texts from many different speakers and writers than fewer texts from a smaller number of speakers and writers.
Finally, two studies concentrated on improving systems of learning to reinforce learning depending on regarding corpus.
An example of a domain-specific literary corpus would be the collected works of an author, which can be used to investigate the style of this particular author, or even to verify disputes about the authorship of a piece of literature where this may be contentious.
Rather than attempting to create a complete and exhaustive list, I focus on a handful of corpora (and related resources, such as text archives and the "Web as Corpus") that are representative of general classes of corpora.
This means that because w 2 is evenly distributed throughout the corpus, its frequency should not be reducedwe should continue to consider each instance as a separate occurrence.
The success of MD also directly depends on the reliability of the automatic identification of linguistic variables (tagging) in corpora.
Second, extremely short texts cannot be easily compared with other texts using many typical quantitative corpus-linguistic methods, such as normalization, because the normalization results become meaningless as the length of the text becomes increasingly short.
In qualitative statistical analysis, on the other hand, we look at multidimensional analysis of observed phenomena in a corpus and try to find factors behind the occurrence of a feature or an element in a text.
Since overcoming the fallibility of introspective data is one of the central motivations for using corpora in the first place, the analysis of a given phenomenon must not be based on a haphazard sample of instances that the researcher happened to notice while reading or, even worse, by searching the corpus for specific examples.
Corpus designers therefore need to reach out to different groups of contributors and use a range of incentives to obtain a representative sample.
Altering the span of the window around the node word where possible collocate words are considered can also significantly affect the results.
In order to identify the occurrences of pragmatic phenomena which are not related to words, it is therefore necessary to scan the entire corpus manually.
The data collection mode makes this corpus unsuitable for many types of research but provides a very useful interface for lexical searches, offering the possibility of looking for simple or compound words and having access to all the occurrences within the context, with an indication of the source for each occurrence.
The standard deviation is an indicator of the amount of variation in a sample (or sub-sample) that is frequently reported; it is good practice to report standard deviations whenever we report means.
This problem is even more obvious in the case of linguistic annotation.
Second, in Section 6 we will consider the issue of variation within English, by looking primarily at genre coverage and balance in the corpora.
For instance, if we want to create a corpus of classroom writing and ask students to volunteer and contribute their texts, we may end up with texts from highly motivated students that will not reflect the written production of the class as such.
In this section, we will present a sample of studies which illustrate the usefulness of corpora for carrying out contrastive linguistic studies.
We conclude with a summary of the chapter and some comments on potential applications of bootstrapping in corpus linguistics that have yet to be attempted.
The final dimension incorporated into our proposed framework is time which will assist with the exploration and visualisation of diachronic corpora.
We have also described the different forms that variables in a corpus may adopt, and highlighted the fact that statistical tests must be adapted to the nature of the variables.
This can be done by calculating frequency, variance, vmr, and t fid f values for each column of the data matrix, sorting each set of values in descending order of magnitude, z-standardizing for comparability, and then co-plotting.
The graph-based data model allows for completely independent annotation layers, united only by joint reference to the same primary text.
As you might already guess from the names, the former have been compiled to provide information about one particular language/variety, whereas the latter ideally provide the same text in several different languages.
The building of bespoke corpora from the web usually requires considerable technical skill and, thus, may not be an option for all corpus linguists, especially beginners.
Other textual markup is internal to the text, and in a spoken text would include such information as speaker IDs, and the beginnings and ends of overlapping speech.
Again, they can protect both against statistical Type I and Type II errors and the better regression coefficients that result allow for better explanation of the phenomena under investigation.
Although all texts were downloaded from the web using the 'web for corpus' approach, COCA was designed in such a way that it excludes web-native genres like blogs and social media.
It represents information of a kind that many corpus creators have expressed an interest in, but which few corpus projects have included (see Chap.
There have been attempts in the past but most have proved to be unsustainable as academic funding models do not allow the continuous expansion of disk storage space required for regular web crawling or the bandwidth required to allow multiple users to carry out complex searches on a large corpus simultaneously.
We give examples of corpus linguistic research in Chapter 4, showing that the corpus linguistic approach is possible for many levels of linguistic analysis and diverse languages.
It is these patterns of repetition which corpus analyses seek to uncover.
In addition, mark up areas of text that represent terms of address (e.g.
The chapter opens with a discussion of how to define a corpus, and then traces the history of corpus linguistics, noting, for instance, that corpus-based research began as early as the fifteenth century, when biblical concordances were created based on passages from the Bible.
In other words, particular linguistic phenomena will be severely misrepresented in the results of corpus queries based on automatically assigned tags or parse trees.
The 5 Quantifying research questions annotation for whether or not an of -construction encodes a relation that could also be encoded by an s-possessive can be done as discussed in Section 4.2.3 of Chapter 4.
When considering the term 'web as corpus', the first question we must ask is whether the web can actually be classed as a corpus according to the criteria set out in Chap.
Now that you already have a pretty good idea of what types of features you might encounter in a text and how this relates to aspects of its organisation, as well as issues that may affect its analysis, let's move on to finding and processing some data in electronic form as a first step in laying the foundation for creating your own corpus and analysing it.
Although clearly out of date now and fraught with a number of issues, including the corpus on which it was based, and subjective decisions regarding what should be included or not, there may be a baby in that bathwater.
These all highlight the relationship between lexis and grammar and are useful to a language learner.
A general corpus usually includes standard text samples as it aims to identify what are central and common features of a language.
And this one example from the domain of syntax can be multiplied endlessly for other variations in syntax, or in lexis, morphology, phraseology, or meaning.
We already saw that the issue of data annotation is extremely complex even in the case of individual lexical items, and the preceding chapter discussed some more complicated examples.
According to him, this problem is all the more serious because even if a corpus were of a very large size and included a representative portion of the language, it would not be fully analyzable by linguists, given the fact that it is impossible to manually analyze the content of billions of sentences.
First of all, when you take a close look at the listing of words + tags in the table, you'll notice that they're in fact hyperlinks that, once clicked, provide you with a concordance of exactly the combination specified, so that you can already narrow down your search in this way.
As is true for any corpora, when the metadata is provided in a separate file without using standoff techniques (e.g.
As can be seen from its name, XML allows users to create their own extended markup frameworks, and thereby makes it possible to increase the separation of form from content even further than was already possible by using HTML and CSS.
First, any text, spoken or written, will lose not only its communicative context (the discourse of which it was originally a part), but also some of its linguistic and paralinguistic properties when it becomes part of a corpus.
An area in which this is very obvious, and which has therefore become one of the most heavily researched areas in corpus linguistics, is the way in which words combine to form so-called collocations.
Other associated verbs of this type are render, get, and set.
We will need the functions switch and menu (which you do not know yet so you may want to briefly look at their help pages -they are not difficult and the script will show you how they are used anyway) to prompt the user to choose the annotation format that will be processed, and we need a conditional with if to then define regular expressions for either choice.
Other text-rich disciplines can trace their origins back to the same computing revolution.
Finally, once a corpus has been created, it can be used for numerous research questions without requiring any additional time or financial costs.
Each observation (i.e., each text with each normed count) will be in a different row.
In some cases, an analyst may not have much choice in whether to use a desktop concordancer or a client-server system: the choice is determined by what data they wish to use.
I will focus in particular on three things: (1) how speaker-specific information can be retrieved; (2) how you can search and retrieve information from different levels of the XML tree; and (3) some XPath syntax aspects that allow for simple character processing.
There are two women in the corpus (Dee Dee Myers and Dana Perino) and six men.
By thus linking description to theory, Gries argues that his corpus-driven study not only describes, but explains and predicts the way the choice between option (5a) and option (5b) is made.
For both the spoken and written parts of the corpus, not all samples are exactly 2,000 words: a sample is not broken off in mid-sentence but at a point (often over or just under the 2,000-word limit) where a natural break occurs.
Even when working within a text genre, we should aim to diversify its sources as much as possible.
Thus, words that actually occur on different lines in the text may still be presented as part of the context.
But we cannot calculate a mean: if five speakers in our sample of ten speakers have a PhD and five have a BA, this does not allow us to claim that all of them have an MA degree on average.
The corpus is available on request from the authors.
As we saw above, a myriad of annotation schemes exist and they can range from very general applicability to appropriate for ultra-specific research questions.
For each category that we discuss, sample clusters of tweets are provided in order to illustrate the contrast between the contact-related use -the target of our analysis -and the noise that we identified along the way.
For instance, with four groups (as in our example), we can run six pair-wise comparisons, which will increase the type I error to 26.5%.
We address several applications of bootstrapping, including the measurement of sample estimate accuracy, the validation of statistical models, the estimation of corpus homogeneity, and random forests.
Notable exceptions include the London-Lund Corpus (LLC) and Lancaster/IBM Spoken English Corpus (SEC), both developed in the 1980s.
Corpus-based studies also expand the range of data considered for analysis beyond the linguist's intuitions, and ensure the accuracy of any generalizations that are made.
For example, if the participants in a corpus are classified into age groups such as group 1 (18-25 years), group 2 (26-40 years) and group 3 (41-60 years) for sociolinguistic analyses, the age variable is an ordinal one.
Over the years, scholars have noted and discussed the occasionally elusive nature of the challenges and suggested solutions to the problems, tackling broader and abstract notions such as representativeness and balance of corpora, but also more concrete questions like sampling, various levels of annotation, precision and recall of corpus queries, dispersion of search hits across a corpus, statistical evaluation, among other points.
That is, if a corpus indeed represents target lexical distributions, a word list extracted from it should have considerable overlap (ideally 100%) with a word list extracted -based on the same selection criteria -from a corpus of the same design but different texts.
If the aim is to be able to include as much of the data in our analysis as possible, this approach is at its most reasonable when there are only a small number of outliers under the chosen length limit, as the exclusion of a handful of outliers do not affect the overall results from a good-sized corpus very much.
Let us assume that we find 67 hits in the female-speaker sample and 71 hits in the male-speaker sample to be such sentences.
But because computerizing and annotating a text is such an integrated process, it is best to combine the processes whenever this is possible.
While the study of pragmatic items can be challenging in a corpus, it is eminently possible.
Depending on what your end goal is, you may want to not only sort (and sort in different ways to obtain different perspectives on your data), but also prune a concordance.
Methodologically, the working of the corpus-stylistic circle here means I tried to find links between the patterns that emerged from the corpus and the discussion of related examples or relevant theories in the literature on Dickens.
For instance, in Windows Notepad, you can select the option for UTF-8 under 'Encoding' in this dialogue, although, unfortunately, there's no way to specify the additional option to exclude the BOM we don't want, and which is in fact unnecessary and, if present, may also cause display issues in some browsers.
The contemporary standard for corpus markup and annotation is XML (eXtensible Markup Language), where added information is indicated by angle brackets <>, as illustrated in Fig.
That said, it requires more data to be able to make valid observations about a large group of people and a general type of discourse than a small group of people and a specific type of discourse.
Second, by using a word list from a dictionary rather than a corpus, morphologists only have access to a limited subset of the speakers' linguistic productions.
There are 314.31 degrees of freedom in our sample (as calculated using the formula in 16), which means that 𝑝 < 0.001.
We have offered examples of this type of research in Chapter 2.
It needs to be noted that in this section we have explored a type of logistic regression called binomial logistic regression, that is a logistic regression with an outcome variable with two categories like the and a/an.
While the Web has increasingly become a corpus used for linguistic analysis, the other two sources of dataan archive of tweets and a collection of Trump's speeches and interviewsare specific to this particular analysis.
As regards precision, results collected automatically from the corpus should be manually checked to make sure they actually include what the researcher is looking for.
Linguists normally look askance at 'bag of words' studies, but I do think they offer interesting new ways of carrying out 'corpus-driven' research.
This is the case for any corpus.
As an example, the lemma result is presented with result as a noun (72,083), as a verb (20,138), and derived adjectival forms (resulting/resultant).
That being said, good practices in corpus linguistics and experimental linguistics require obtaining information about participants beforehand, which can eventually eliminate this type of bias.
Corpus linguistics is a particularly effective method for establishing the frequent contexts in which a word or an expression is used.
The other noticeable feature is that there's stronger balance in the materials in that the spoken parts distinguish between public vs. private or scripted vs. unscripted speech, and that the written parts are differentiated into different levels/abilities and types of writing.
In the case of a special corpus, the identification of target users is important.
It is therefore imperative both to inform individuals that their speech is being recorded and to obtain written permission from them to use their speech in a corpus.
This book is a practical introduction to statistical procedures in corpus linguistics, a discipline that uses computers to analyse language, organized according to linguistic topics.
If the text is annotated or corrected by hand then this could form the basis of a training corpus for an automatic tagging system which can then learn from the human annotators in order to attempt to replicate their coding later on larger amounts of data.
Their maybe most extreme, and thus worrying, result is that the exact same distribution of a target word -a uniform distribution across 10% of a corpus -can result in a D value of 0.0 when the computation is based on a corpus split into 10 parts, versus a D value of 0.905 when the computation is based on a corpus split into 1000 parts.
If you were considering creating a corpus of spontaneous conversations, how would you go about recording and transcribing them?
The overload in corpus linguistics is symptomatic of a more general trend.
The SHARLET corpus covers a prominent subgenre within the corporate financial report, namely that of shareholders' letters.
The written text produced in two different conditions can be analyzed for variation in linguistic features and interpreted functionally.
This relationship is addressed by questions about what linguistic features are best regarded as register, genre or style features, but also by testing models originally designed for the analysis of literary texts on a larger corpus.
Most text editors and word processing programs have a search function that will allow a user to find segments, words, or phrases.
Interval variables are uncommon in corpus linguistics.
Corpus linguistics depends on computer science for various reasons.
This function is a good function to start with as it chooses what type of graph to use based on the kind(s) of variables to be plotted.
The BNC contains 1 232 966 words from the Daily Telegraph (all files whose names begin with AH, AJ and AK), which will serve as our right-wing corpus, and 918 159 words from the Guardian (all files whose names begin with A8, A9 or AA, except file AAY), which will serve as our corresponding left-wing (or at least left-leaning) corpus.
It would be difficult to imagine how one might use a 450-million-word corpus such as COCA without using a computer to help identify certain language features.
It is precisely this type of quantitative reporting that is likely to be consistent over many studies, thus lending itself to comparison and synthesis.
I then present what I take to be the methodological foundations that distinguish corpus linguistics from other, superficially Preface similar methodological frameworks, and discuss the steps necessary to build concrete research projects on these foundations -formulating the research question, operationalizing the relevant constructs and deriving quantitative predictions, extracting and annotating data, evaluating the results statistically and drawing conclusions.
It should be a synchronic corpus, corresponding to current uses of the language.
We showed how we can do a corpus-based study with already identified language features, whether doing a lexical study or searching for the use of particular grammatical patterns.
Because when studying lexico-grammatical variation, we usually presuppose a certain uniformity among texts of the same type, we don't have to worry about this problem too much apart from making sure that in our sample, linguistic features come from a range of texts.
The majority of ICE corpora were released without detailed bibliographical background information on individual texts included in the corpus or biographical information for the spontaneous spoken conversations, notable exceptions being ICE-NZ and ICE-IRE.
Besides awareness of these difficulties, a more bottom-up and data-driven approach to describing diatypic text properties may, in the long term, provide the more satisfactory solutions.
An example of an annotation model like this is the UCREL Semantic Analysis System (USAS).
Now, let us move on to the question of which samples to include in the corpus.
Finally, some language varieties cannot be attributed to a single speaker at all -political speeches are often written by a team of speech writers that may or may not include the person delivering the speech, newspaper articles may include text from a number of journalists and press agencies, published texts in general are typically proof-read by people other than the author, and so forth.
A heterogeneous monitor corpus includes text samples from all subject areas and the individuality of the source of a text and its writer are well attested.
Used together, standard corpus tools and packages such as NVivo could represent a powerful combination for users interested in building, manually annotating and exploiting corpora.
Whilst corpus-based information on article usage might not add much to the treatment of articles in grammar books, we believe that some areas would really benefit from the inclusion of the results of corpus studies.
The most important thing to remember/look for in such a program is a menu item that either provides us with a 'Save as…' or 'Export' option from the 'File' menu to save the text as plain text, as we've seen for web pages earlier, or some item on a different menu that will probably contain the word 'extract', such as in older versions of Adobe Acrobat or GSview.
Corpus-based grammatical research (following the principle of total accountability) cannot ignore such areas, and often finds that they are by no means uninterestingrather the opposite.
Due to these advantages, we'll explore the use of XML further in Section 11.2.
Note that in the simple example presented here, the conditional distribution is a matter of all-or-nothing: all instances of windscreen occur in the British part of the corpus and all instances of windshield occur in the American part.
What is the difference between "corpus" and "experimental" data?
For example, we know that the use of nouns and adjectives in text is strongly correlated.
Finally, because of the scarcity of speech errors, usually all speech errors perceived (in a particular amount of time) are included into the corpus, whereas, at least usually and ideally, corpus compilers are more picky and select the material to be included with an eye to the criteria of representativity and balancedness outlined above.
On average, 8 clusters per word (min = 3, max = 10) were retained for annotation.
By controlling the situation in which language is produced corpus compilers increase the probability that the phenomena they are interested in are actually included in the corpus.
To transfer and align the data is probably the most difficult and time-consuming part of the exercise because it's easy enough to make mistakes when creating new rows and moving the data around, as well as adding the noughts to the relevant cells where a type doesn't exist in one of the corpora.
While all of these cases have the form of the possessive construction and match the strings above, opinions may differ on whether they should be included in a sample of English possessive constructions.
Second, you cannot simply replace word boundaries "\\b" with tags because then you get tags before and after the words: Let us first look at the simple tagging example from above.
These date from 1989 to 2012, and include journal papers and book chapters, but also PhDs and conference proceedings (published as text and not just slides or oral presentations).
By wrapping our text in the container element, we've effectively created the first (top) level of a hierarchy or categorisation, as well as a file that is now, at least technically, valid XML, despite the fact that it hasn't been sub-divided into meaningful parts yet.
Another, and probably even more important, aspect of good data analysis is constant questioning of the 'sanity' of the data: Is this the expected size of the corpus or have I counted also part-of-speech tags by mistake?
Those compiling spoken corpora should therefore expect to gather much more speech than they will actually use to compensate for all the recordings they make that contain imperfections preventing their use in the ultimate corpus being created.
The first one basically gave you a means of designing your own ways of classifying your data in a sensible manner, which then enables you to use the corpus-based analysis methods we've discussed throughout the course in order to extract and count relevant information.
We are able then to identify the type of research being reported in each, basically on stylistic grounds.
Annotations of existing spoken corpora differ in two ways: annotation layering and time-alignment.
The use of personal pronouns to negotiate identity has received some attention in corpus pragmatics.
As anyone who has ever transcribed speech knows, the flow of speech is much faster than the ability of the transcriber to type.
This is precisely the situation where exhaustive retrieval can only be achieved by a manual corpus search, i.e., by reading the entire corpus and deciding for each word, phrase or clause, whether it constitutes an example of the phenomenon we are looking for.
The spoken section of a corpus should reconcile a variety of choices.
If the annotations are not changed throughout the corpus, that can cause issues later on.
However, given that there is, by now, a large number of corpus-linguistic textbooks available, ranging from the very decent to the excellent, a few words seem in order to explain why I feel that it makes sense to publish another one.
Is the corpus constructed in a balanced manner?
In 2011-12 the DECTE project combined NECTE with the NECTE2 corpus, which was begun in 2007 and is ongoing.
Also, the fact that affixes always occur as parts of words has consequences for the way we can, and should, count them; in quantitative corpus-linguistics, this is a crucial point, so I will discuss it in quite some detail before we turn to our case studies.
When discussing sizes of spoken-language corpora within documentary linguistics, the time length of primary audio and/or video data is often cited (see Thieberger 2006:7 on the corpus of Nafsan (formally South Efate)).
Essentially, being a concordance facility, too, some of its basic features are rather similar to the ones we've already discussed for AntConc.
We hope this textbook provides a good first foundation for corpus linguistics and generates your excitement about this large and diverse field.
In the late 1990s, corpus-driven studies of recurrent lexical phrases in English registers began to appear.
Since this is a written corpus, let us define Length in terms of letters and assume that this is a sufficiently close approximation to phonological length.
Elements, in their most basic form, are generally represented in markup languages by pairs of opening and closing angle brackets, i.e.
Of course, a corpus of the size of the BNC cannot be easily analyzed without the use of some kind of specialized software to be able to observe patterns using all the data contained in it.
There are various ways of processing (e.g., data analytics, concordance, collocation, keyword marking, local-word-grouping, lexical clustering, lemmatization, morphological processing, sentence processing, and named entity marking), which are applied to a corpus with appropriate technological supports.
What about a file per text included in the corpus?
Chapter 1 for a more detailed description of the Brown Corpus).
Much research has been done to automate the process of adding the most common forms of analysis, so that it is not necessary for a human being to read through the whole corpus and manually insert the tags.
Without access to tagged corpora, advanced programming and statistical knowledge, your corpusdriven research will be limited to focusing on word lists, keyword analyses, and n-grams.
If there is not enough evidence, or the evidence is biased towards, for example, a certain genre or certain types of speakers/writers (see 'diachronic representativeness' above), the patterns we observe are ambiguous.
However, by taking a small sample of the instances and going back to the document images, we discovered that about a third of the instances of "economy" were in fact OCR errors for "oeconomy".
In a POS-tagged corpus, we could, for example, search for a sequence of a pronoun and a noun in addition to the sequence pronoun-determiner that we used above, which would give us cases like (12d), or we could search for forms of be followed by a past participle followed by a determiner or noun, which would give us passives like those in (12b).
First, to adequately represent the various kinds of written American English, a wide range of different types of written English were selected for inclusion in the corpus.
In the graph, it clusters in the proximity of the sample from Dee Dee Myers and far apart from the other samples.
In historical pragmatics, contextual mappings with illustrative examples are used to complement the corpus-linguistic assessments.
The corpora available range from a corpus of American English, the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), to the Coronavirus Corpus, a corpus containing texts retrieved from the Web containing discussions of the Covid-19 virus.
As in the case of contrastive studies, translation studies has benefited from the availability of multilingual corpora, as well as theoretical and methodological advances in corpus linguistics.
R and shiny R have proven to be an efficient combination to develop and deploy the corpus.
For example, a topic examining gender differences could involve creating a corpus of fitness articles with females as the intended audience and comparing this to a corpus of fitness articles with males as the intended audience.
Because of the complexity of the TEI system of annotation for speech, the discussion will be more illustrative than comprehensive.
A second step may be to manipulate the actual linguistic data (that is, what the A. Ädel people represented in the corpus said or wrote) by changing also names and places mentioned which could in some way give away the source.
In fact, as ICE components have been compiled over three decades, annotation practices seem to vary from component to component.
I will leave it as an exercise to the reader to determine whether and in what direction these frequencies differ from what would be expected either under an assumption of equal proportions or given the proportion of female and male speakers in the corpus.
After that, ideally you choose "Unicode (UTF-8)" as the character set, "{Tab}" as the field delimiter and, usually, delete the text delimiter.
Of course, more complex constructs, such as tables or lists, will never quite look the same in plain-text format, but the essential thing is that we can somehow get a handle on the text content.
For example, "news_15_election_00" would mean a news text from 2015 about an election in 2000.
The results of searches can also help in establishing trends in a corpus.
These logistical realities explain why 90 percent of the BNC (a second-generation corpus) contains written texts and only 10 percent spoken texts.
The synthesist's domain-specific knowledge here is indispensable concerning what type(s) of questions have been sufficiently addressed in the primary literature, for example, or what questions are theoretically and/or practically relevant to address.
We then provide a register analytical framework for interpreting corpus findings (Chapter 2).
Semantic feature annotation is separated from the form slot by a <.>.
All words without a subscript are new types and hapax legomena at the point at which they appear in the text; if a word has a subscript, it means that it is a repetition of a previously mentioned word, the subscript is its token frequency at this point in the text.
However, given how labour-intensive this approach is, it is very common to automate the process of extracting collocates from the local context around the node.
A small corpus with wider text variations is a much better representative than a large corpus with fewer text variations.
The COCA is a web-based corpus.
One of the ways of selecting material for a corpus is by stratified sampling, where the hierarchical structure (or 'strata') of the population is determined in advance.
An important difference between sampling in corpus linguistics and in other sciences is that a corpus is never a random sample of the population.
Of course, different tagging programs will have different terminology and provide varying levels of detail about the items being tagged.
This is a possible explanation, but it seems more likely that the differences have to do with the production circumstances related to constructing texts individually as opposed to constructing texts as writers are interacting with another person to produce a single text collaboratively.
In order to be reliable, an annotation should ideally be carried out by several annotators independently, and their measured agreement should be placed above a certain threshold (see Chapter 7, section 7.5).
If we categorize data in terms of such a nominal variable, the only way to quantify them is to count the number of observations of each category in a given sample and express the result in absolute frequencies (i.e., raw numbers) or relative frequencies (such as percentages).
From a theoretical perspective, these results may seem to be of secondary interest, at least in the domain of lexis, since lexical differences between the major varieties of English are well documented.
On the one hand, it is preferable to create a corpus including language samples which represent a coherent whole, rather than isolated sentences.
Corpus-informed books can provide accurate lists of verbs that are frequent in the passive based on information found in corpora.
For example, if the question to be investigated is the assertion that women talk more about their emotions than men, the operationalization of this question will require building or obtaining a lexicon of words related to emotions that can be searched in a corpus, chosen to make it possible to determine whether women actually use these words more than men.
In all cases, it is important to systematically avoid including the same portions of text, for example, always the beginnings or the endings.
Since this function is central to very many corpus loading operations to be discussed below, we will discuss it and a variety of its arguments in some detail.
The first one explores D-values of a set of words in the British National Corpus, which, for the purpose of testing what effect the numbers of corpus parts n one assumes, was divided into n = 10, 1000, and 1000 equal-sized parts; crucially, the words explored were words for which theoretical considerations would lead an analysis to expect fairly different D-values, contrasting words such as at, all, or time (which should be distributed fairly evenly) with words such as erm, ah, and urgh (which, given their preponderance in spoken data, should be distributed fairly unevenly).
The sparsity of the data in the table is due to the fact that the analyzed sample is very small, and this problem is exacerbated by the fact that the little data available is spread across too many categories.
As an alternative, corpora can be stored in external data services such as clouds with corpus access for example by compressed media streaming.
With the focus on textual meanings, limitations of the application of corpus methods are highlighted.
A random sample of 2,000 words was taken for each MP, with MPs excluded who had used less than 2,000 words (thereby removing only 3 MPs).
This assumption requires reflection on what is meant by corpus representativeness.
Whether existing corpus methods are entirely suitable for the analysis of texts of 280 characters or fewer is a separate question requiring further research, but it is certainly possible to build Twitter corpora and conduct interesting linguistic analyses of them (e.g.
Indeed, we can observe that text no.
It could even be argued that clear outliers do not even represent the varieties of interest in the corpus particularly well, and that therefore it would even be beneficial to exclude them.
Thus, what possibilities we have for the analysis of a corpus is inevitably a function of the affordances of the available software tools.
In addition, from frequency rank number 4,077 onwards, the words in the corpus only have one occurrence.
However, for other phenomena, the annotation will only refer to very precise elements in the corpus.
We then need nchar to determine how many three-grams we will have to create/retrieve and then store, and a for-loop that applies substr to the cleaned text vector to extract the threegrams.
As I said before, there are now a number of options for sorting according to different fields, for instance comparing the ranks in one corpus against another or, perhaps more importantly, seeing whether certain words dominate to some extent in one corpus in comparison.
Following from that, we consider how data processing procedures in corpus linguisticsin terms of corpus mark-up, annotation and exploitationappear to be converging, to an extent, with those in (especially qualitative) social science.
This implies that numerous factors control the content, type, and use of a corpus as well as numerous ways that one can employ to classify corpora.
What therefore seems to be even more important than recognising the c-unit as the correct unit is the fact that one should always be aware that there are certain boundaries in text that form natural borders between the units of text we may want to see as belonging together, an issue that gains in importance once we move away from looking at single words only.
We can also infer characteristics about the whole Matukar Panau speaking population in all instances of speech from that sample, that is, how frequently all speakers under all circumstances will use serial verb constructions.
In fact, it is the squared version of sample standard deviation (see Section 2.4), hence SD 2 .
A person might, for example, collect examples of news editorials that are on a particular topic and refer to this collection as a "corpus".
To be able to assess these factors properly, good metadata is needed about the language users as well as good metadata or annotations about each specific context of use.
A second portion of the corpus focuses on advanced learners who have all lived in France, for a period ranging from 1-2 years to more than 30 years (see Chapter 3, section 3.3 for a study based on these data).
Load the XML file in your browser and view the result.
Multimodality and Active Listenership: A Corpus Approach.
One big advantage, at least in comparison to HTML, is that a large set of tag definitions/DTDs for linguistic purposes, such as for the TEI (Text Encoding Initiative), were originally designed for SGML, although more and more of these have been or are being 'ported' to XML these days, too.
In order for the results to be replicable, corpus linguists need to make their choice of corpora and analytical techniques transparent.
This may depend on a variety of factors, such as availability, the potential for obtaining permission for copyrighted data, how many people are actually working on creating the corpus, etc.
GloWbE was constructed using 'web for corpus' techniques, seeded through search engines queries.
A search for this same connective in the COBUILD corpus of spoken English showed a frequency of one occurrence every 500 words, which matches the use by witnesses rather than the police.
Finally, the position of the collocate in text (whether it occurs predominantly before or after the node) is shown by the position of the collocate in the graph (left, middle or right).
The ways corpora are used and integrated are also in need of further study: how do controlled, teacher-led corpus tasks compare with the type of more serendipitous, independent hands-on corpus work traditionally associated with Johns' data-driven learning?
The data used consists of two corpora: a male corpus (10 speakers) and a female corpus (10 speakers).
The second type of voice in English is called the passive voice.
Type in 'corpus linguistics filetype:doc', and hit 'Enter'.
At this point, you have a well-structured corpus that is guided by a well-motivated research question (see Chapter 5, Section 5.2).
This study is situated mainly within the MDA paradigm, so it focuses on small-scale corpora of situated discourse, utilizing discourse analytic methods as the initial point of departure, but discusses how such an approach can be extended with the integration of corpus methods.
The plot() function will here display the relative frequency of each clause type order (mc-sc or sc-mc) per conjunction (when, before, after or because); that is, this function can be used to plot the variables ORDER and CONJ, using the code below.
Another consideration in sharing corpus resources involves how to make these accessible to others and how to preserve digital data.
This can give users the opportunity to explore the corpus from different angles and linguistic perspectives.
We were only concerned about the low frequency of the form: in the last period studied , there were 32 tokens of the sentence-initial usage in COHA, which meant that our results might have been tarnished by errors made in the sampling of the corpus.
The decision of the classification for each of these tokens from the corpora does require some subjective decision-making from the researcher, as is the case in many corpus studies.
An affix may have a high TTR because it was productively used at the time of the sample, or because it was productively used at some earlier period in the history of the language in question.
In small corpora (such as the Romeo and Juliet corpus), many content words of interest would necessarily be low-frequency.
In Chapter 3, you will have the opportunity to do situational analyses in some of the projects, and in Chapter 5 you will do a situational analysis of your own corpus.
Open the file in your text editor and examine its format.
The term corpus is derived from the Latin word corpus which means "body".
To summarize these three points: bootstrapping cannot provide better data or more data from the population than what is contained in the sample.
Part II is organized as a progression of the linguistic levels, beginning with corpus-based analyses of prosodic characteristics, moving on to chapters dealing with lexical characteristics (keywords, collocations, and phraseology), followed by chapters on grammatical features (descriptive grammar, grammatical variation, grammatical change, and the intersection of grammar and lexis), and finally concluding with chapters on the corpus-based study of discourse functions and pragmatics.
Part III for more about the specificities of different corpus types).
In many cases, it is necessary to analyze the corpus manually so as to find interesting occurrences.
Another recent trend in the corpus linguistics research, according to the current study, was the emergence of large web-based corpus (e.g., COCA).
For example, fitting a tree with a lower minimal criterion may be useful in a pilot study performed for exploratory purposes; • minimum 20 observations in a node for a split to be considered, specified by minsplit = 20; • according to the default settings, there should be at least seven observations in one node after a split, minbucket = 7.
This is a very powerful and useful tool to determine the vocabulary characteristics of a text.
It should be noted that this is fundamentally rather similar to the procedure of a key items analysis, except that we are comparing the vicinity of the node to the rest of the corpus, rather than comparing two different corpora, and some of the same considerations apply.
It also does not require any choices concerning annotation categories; however, there may be a danger to project patterns into the data post hoc.
For example, Cowden-Clarke (1881) took sixteen years to manually produce a complete concordance of all words (apart from a small set of words considered insignificant and occurring frequently such as be, do, and have) in Shakespeare's writings.
Why would collecting additional data be a useful strategy, or, more generally speaking, why are corpus-linguists (and other scientists) often intent on making their samples as large as possible and/or feasible?
It should be noted that we should generally be sceptical of an all too clearcut conception of linguistic levels, and it is corpus-linguistic research that has advanced our understanding of interactions between, for instance, syntax, morphology and phonology in the area of clitics (some examples of which we observed above) and affixation.
This annotation therefore involves an interpretation on the part of the researcher, which is, in part, necessarily subjective.
This study is significant because it analyzes frequent conversational features that previously had not been systematically researched using corpus linguistics.
Corpus designers, however, should be mindful of this problem.
In addition, the study employs bootstrapping techniques and mixed-effects modeling to investigate issues such as the role of idiolectal differences and the validity of cross-corpus generalizations.
In contrast, a written text will contain features of orthography, such as paragraph boundaries or font changes.
However, in the meantime, corpus pragmatics can do more to show the real worth of methodology to the wider field of pragmatics.
If you wish to show that one text is very similar to another, the higher the overlap the better.
If we are careful with our operational definitions, then, we may actually use corpus-linguistic methods to investigate not (only) the role of words in texts, but the role of their referents in a particular community.
This chapter covers the basics of compiling linguistic material in the form of a corpus.
In another type, such combinations generally create a complex meaning, as in, for example, up until or down below, where the resulting meaning is a mix of the semantic properties of both elements.
Whatever seeds are chosen, this is only the first step in the process of building a corpus from the web.
We'll talk more about this type of issue in Section 4.4.1, where we'll explore ways of dealing with such features of the text in order to retain relatively 'clean' data.
Do the texts in my corpus allow for an investigation of a specific research issue?
Type 5 (o = 174, e = 121.9) represents the most common pattern overall: in this type the suffix combines with a complex verbal stem that encodes a transitive action.
This includes errors (which were the focus of pre-corpus interlanguage studies), but also cases of under-or overuse, i.e.
This can be done by taking a random subsample of linguistic features from the corpus.
Such research has also identified a shift in use of the blog format from its original 'online diary' focus, meaning that it is now possible to capture a wide variety of topics and communicative intentions in a corpus made up exclusively of blogs.
The segments of speech that overlap need to be marked so that the eventual user of the corpus knows which parts overlap in the event that he or she wishes to study overlapping speech.
I briefly discuss here a few well-known corpus processing techniques for understanding these technical issues.
Thus, it is always preferable to report the frequencies of all values, and, in fact, I have never come across a corpus-linguistic study reporting modes.
The usefulness of the available text mining tools is also seriously limited by their lack of customisability.
First, it does not follow the principle of separating distinct semantic layers (such as segments vs. morpheme functions) in the annotation syntax, thus making this format harder to read, process, and convert than others.
Wireless microphones are appropriate in recording situations of this type too, and avoid the problem of the speaker being constrained by the length of the cord attaching the microphone and recorder.
Even if the corpus compilers are deeply familiar with the material, it is still the case that memory is both short and fallible, so if they want to use the corpus in a few years' time, important details of the specific context of the data may well have been forgotten.
It is for this very same reason that it is impossible to conclude that a word simply does not exist in a language just because it is absent from a corpus.
This will then be followed by all instances where the relative frequency is higher in the first (general) corpus, and you can easily identify these 'dominant' words due to the fact that they'll have a ratio above 1.
The data presented above have shown that the envelope of variation that is studied will result in a different picture of the relation among ENL and ESL varieties: it makes a difference, for instance, whether the overall text frequency of PPs is compared or whether the variable is defined more narrowly, e.g.
We then need length to determine how many three-grams we will have to create/retrieve and then store, and a for-loop that applies paste (with collapse) to the text vector to create the three-grams.
Following XML conventions, TEI tags always begin with chevrons < > and close with </ >.
In particular, a writing class is ideally suited to such study as the teacher could set out rules for the type of files that students submit and dictate the format that file names should take.
An outline of collocation and the measurements used to strengthen assumptions will be made from the collocations.
Should these standards be lacking, it would be a good idea to consider the annotation schemes used in previous studies.
Sample C, in contrast, exhibits clear characteristics of (simulated) spoken language, much shorter and less complex syntax, even single-word 'sentences', with names, titles and informal terms of address (old chap) used when the characters are addressing/introducing each other, exclamations, contractions, and at least one hesitation marker (Er).
Bootstrapping makes it possible to measure the accuracy and reliability of sample estimates and is often recommended for small samples and samples with unknown or non-normal distributions.
There is an alternative, however: speakers sometimes use adverbs that explicitly refer to the type of beginning.
Other sections of the chapter focus on additional issues relevant to planning the construction of a corpus, such as how to determine the appropriate size of a corpus and the length of particular texts that the corpus will contain (complete texts versus shorter samples from each text, e.g.
Perspectives on the matter vary between scholarly approaches: the criteria for determining what is "good data" -for example, considerations on the accessibility and processing of the data -can be quite different in Digital Humanities and corpus linguistics.
In addition, usage conventions may vary considerably between languages even when the same text genre exists in both, which makes them difficult to compare.
All of the figures obtained for each portion of the corpus are then added, and divided by 2.
When "doing" corpus linguistics, students need to gain experience searching a corpus and interpreting the results of their corpus searches so that they can use this information to explain why their analysis and findings are important or relevant.
For example, we can categorize a sample of speakers by their age and then calculate the mean age of our sample.
However, we have to remember that the type/token ratio is very sensitive to the length of the text; it decreases as the text becomes longer and more words get used again (recycled).
In the search box, type in the word, round as indicated in the following graphic.
Remember that the most powerful package to handle XML data in R is XML, but also remember that it has a bad memory leak when used on Windows systems.
As I stated before, because many of the steps you may need to take in order to produce your corpus may frequently involve making changes to the original data, it's advisable to document the steps you've taken in your preparation as much as possible, to allow both yourself and any other potential users of your corpus to understand the exact nature of the data.
Collocational strength is particularly relevant in corpus-based studies of lexical relations, for example, where collocations point to semantic differences between lexemes that are often thought of as synonyms (cf.
But as regards, for example, the occurrences of adjectives within proper names -as in magical in Magical Mystery Tour -no annotation is necessarily available for us to separate such instances from regular uses of the adjective, and close manual inspection is therefore needed to exclude such items from the analysis.
Next, write the individual definitions for them, using the after pseudoclass with an appropriate CSS content attribute that uses the correct attribute of the XML element to extract and display its value.
We could categorize all grammatical expressions of possession in a corpus in terms of the values s-possessive and of-possessive, count them and express the result in terms of absolute or relative frequencies.
In fact, the word equal occurs 22,480 times in the corpus, and the word identical occurs 8,080 times.
The third most frequent word is chalet, with 8,184 occurrences in the corpus, corresponding to frequency rank number 13,609 and frequency class number 13.
If no style sheet is explicitly provided, most browsers will try to render the XML content using their own default style sheets, though.
It only means that they did not have an opportunity to produce them in the corpus.
Put differently, if we go through the occurrences of mini-in the BNC word by word, the probability that the next instance is a new type would be 22.4 percent, so we will encounter a new type about every four to five hits.
Thus, we can easily rank speakers in a sample of university graduates based on the highest degree they have completed.
The disadvantage of this approach is that the top collocates will typically be function words co-occurring with the node merely by the virtue of their frequency anywhere in the corpus.
This information can be considered comparable to metadata for texts in a corpus or to demographic data in a study with human participants.
One way to answer this question is to examine the guidelines established by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) for the encoding of electronic texts, including linguistic corpora (www.tei-c.org/ release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/CC.html).
For example, the category question could be defined as follows for an annotation of speech acts: "Any utterance used in context as a request for information, whether a direct or indirect one".
The idea of the Web as a corpus was initially a controversial notion, largely because at the time, more traditional corpora were the norm, and analyzing the Web, with its seemingly endless size and unknown content, contradicted the whole idea of what a corpus was thought to be.
On the other hand, there are textbooks that focus one or more specific corpus-based techniques, discussing very specific phenomena (often the research interests of the textbook authors themselves) using a narrow range of techniques (often involving specific software solutions).
She analysed the use of the English discourse particles now, oh/ah, just, sort of, actually, and some phrases such as and that sort of thing in the London-Lund corpus and compared this to the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus of written English and the COLT Corpus.
We will return to this issue and its consequences for authenticity presently, but first let us discuss some general problems with the corpus linguist's broad notion of authenticity.
Of course, logistical constraints may necessitate collecting texts at one stage and computerizing and annotating them at a later stage, in which case it is crucial that as much information about the text be obtained initially so that, at a later stage, those working with the text will be able to easily recover this information.
Parsing a corpus is a more complicated undertaking, since larger structures, such as phrases and clauses, must be identified.
In Section 2.4, I will reflect on the question of whether corpus linguistics is now tooldriven, i.e.
As previously mentioned, a better method might be to define a sampling frame and to divide the samples to be collected depending on the important properties of such a frame.
Within mainstream descriptive linguistics, a corpus is a useful resource based on which faithful language description can be made.
Legal written English was excluded from the ICE on the grounds that it is a highly specialized type of English firmly grounded in a tradition dating back hundreds of years, and thus does not truly represent English as it is written in the 1990s (the years during which texts for the ICE are being collected).
Likewise, the stylistic genre of the corpus should be compatible with the question under investigation.
However, both Biber's and Leech's approaches to representativeness may lead the linguist into difficulties when s/he is confronted with historical material.
They should: r allow the (default) encoding to be set to UTF-8; ideally also to convert between encodings r support regular expressions in search-and-replace operations r be HTML/XML-aware, i.e.
In contrast, if a corpus is syntactically parsed, various types of grammatical information is provided, such as which structures are noun phrases, verb phrases, subordinate clauses, and imperative sentences.
The reason for this was that the formatting and layout options contained in documents of these types are usually not stored as plain text, but instead are often binary coded, and therefore we have no (easy) way of dealing with these.
These features have resulted in Python becoming one of the most popular languages used in corpus linguistics work today.
These are just some of the issues we need to constantly be aware of when we use such tools, so the idea that 'bigger is better', even if it is indeed often important to work with very large amounts of data for such research as collocation analysis in order to be able to find rarer combinations, may not always be fully justified if the quantity of data isn't equally matched by quality.
Corpus-based typology language community (being all from the same geographic area) and can therefore not account for observed cross-linguistic differences.
In addition, this program is able to show you how the word (or collocate or lexical bundle or any n-gram) is distributed within each of your texts (a concordance plot) as well as how many texts include examples of your search term.
Nevertheless, there are disadvantages to the corpus-based approach as well.
Links to websites providing online access to corpora, as well as corpus consultation tools, are listed at the end of the chapter.
Both of these mistakes basically may cause you to lose valuable time that could be spent on actually analysing your data, thus 'throwing away' one of the most important advantages of using corpus linguistics as a methodology, which is that it allows you to save a significant amount of time finding a large amount of potentially relevant and interesting data quickly.
I wonder when are they coming) as well as in yes/no-type embedded questions (e.g.
In order to be able to determine the size of our text collection and relevant proportion in subsections, we need to evaluate it accordingly.
Comparability is sometimes complicated by rather technical reasons such as different choices of file formats, corpus formats and syntax, and coding schemes.
When a corpus has been tagged, the fundamental techniques of corpus analysisfrequency counts and concordance searches, which will be introduced at length in the next section -can be undertaken at levels of analysis higher than the orthographic word-form.
It is known that the recording context has a strong influence on the type of constructions used, both in child-directed speech and by the children themselves.
This means that at least some rank values will occur more than once, which is a typical situation for corpus-linguistic research involving ordinal data.
To illustrate this, we ran a lexical bundle search in a corpus of webtexts.
This means that, on average, there are over 61,000 instances of the definite article for every million tokens in the corpus.
Because the corpus is large, this does not necessarily have a large impact on overall patterns.
A general corpus tends to represent a language, which is considered 'standard' in works in linguistics and language technology.
As such, it has become an important practical challenge in corpus linguistics to determine how data annotation practices can evolve along with the needs of researchers (e.g.
They use a corpus to find out how these individual features vary across contexts/registers.
In a negative directional hypothesis, the sample group will perform worse than the population.
Let us define a corpus somewhat crudely as a large collection of authentic text (i.e., samples of language produced in genuine communicative situations), and corpus linguistics as any form of linguistic inquiry based on data derived from such a corpus.
The table consists of 257 lines (one line per preposition type) and 19 columns (one column per variable).
In corpus linguistics the procedure identifying and marking the boundaries of word tokens is called tokenisation.
The potential influences that these variables have on a corpus are summarized in the following categories.
By virtue of being in a text together, many linguistic variables are related in some way.
This section is tightly connected with Chapter 11 where we will explain various types of research that builds on these or similar types of annotation systems.
Before any material can be included in the corpus, however, each transcript needs to be checked against the recorded episode to ensure that the transcription is not only correct, but also sufficiently detailed for the specific research purposes.
In order to verify these hypotheses, they used a written corpus (Le Soir newspaper) and a spoken corpus (Valibel database), both representing the variety of French spoken in Belgium.
However, corpus researchers need an understanding of the issues that arise in corpus construction even if they never build any corpora of their own.
Such processes are vital in order to ensure that the machine-readable text is as accurate as possible.
Understanding Encoding: Character Sets, File Size, etc.
As a consequence, it is usually impossible to extract a complete sample of a given phenomenon manually, and this has lead to a widespread use of computers and corpus linguistic software applications in the field.
This chapter presents some of the key 50 A. Zeldes characteristics distinguishing different corpus architectures.
Save the file and compare the results to the output produced by the Simple PoS Tagger, focussing on mainly higher-level category tag elements to ensure comparability.
It is important to remember that corpus methods do not just involve using computers to find relevant examples; these methods also focus on analyzing and characterizing the examples for a qualitative interpretation.
In terms of the composition of the corpus and its relation to the individual clusters, you'll hopefully notice very quickly that, with collocates occurring on the right, our results contain a relatively high number of proper names.
The primary goal of semantic annotation is to identify the sense a word denotes when it is used in a text.
In the literature, this type of structure is associated with the presentation of new events in discourse.
Finally, the CHECL concludes with a major section on applications of corpus-based research.
Options include the FireAnt package designed specifically for corpus linguists, as well as general purpose software such as IFTTT, Import.io, and TAGS.
Indeed, in the corpus, several articles referred to Roman Polanski's residence, which made these associations very strong, but these words do not obviously collocate in everyday language.
Their main conclusion of the first case study is that "D values based on 1,000 corpus parts completely fail to discriminate among words with uniform versus skewed distributions in naturalistic data" (p. 454).
We can avoid these problems by drawing our sample from the corpus itself.
To corpus linguists, however, the database also presents multiple issues, which need to be addressed to make full use of it.
Current conceptions of corpus linguistics started with the creation of the Quirk Corpus (which contained print samples of spoken and written English) in 1955 at the Survey of English Usage at University College London.
This splitting (division of the data) continues until a stopping criterion is reached, at which point the data in each node should be relatively homogenous.
Yet in practice, the selection is guided by text selection principles (see below) to avoid bias in the selection process.
In Chapter 5, the question of the useability of databases for corpus linguistic purposes is addressed by Turo Hiltunen, who discusses issues relating to the use of materials in the British Library Newspapers database.
While corpus linguistics has very little to say to those with interests in, for instance, generative grammar, it is of great value to those who are interested in studying pragmatics: how language is used.
We will call the word love, our word of interest, a 'node'.
Therefore, a paragraph with the number 5 may be represented as <p n="5">…</p>, where the ellipsis (…) stands for the text contained inside it, or as <para n="5">…</para> or even <paragraph n="5">…</paragraph>, if you want to be even more explicit about it being a paragraph.
The study investigated a range of lexico-grammatical variables including the lemma FUCK, the adverb lovely, the discourse markers you know, sort of, and really, negative concord (e.g.
It is also investigated how the corpus can be employed in implementations that tell the story differently using various styles of telling, co-telling, or like a content planner.
In order to build a corpus to address this issue, you would need to make sure that there is an adequate number of newspaper articles that have been written at different time periods.
Finally, two fixed effects candidates are annotated (the type of the head of the direct object and the logarithmised length of the direct object in words).
Of particular prominence in corpus linguistics is the contexts of words, and related to this the corpus linguistic concepts of collocations.
The management of a corpus is a complex and tedious task.
Then, we only need to adapt the "show_corpus" function from Script 5 to process each file and count all the words in the corpus.
Ditto tags are a way of tokenizing the corpus at orthographic word boundaries while allowing words to span more than one token.
In the corpus of spoken French from Quebec, there is no occurrence of the verb détester produced by men, versus 16 occurrences produced by women.
Corpus-based contrastive linguistics was first pioneered by Stig Johansson in the 1990s and has been thriving ever since.
A corpus is truly 'representative' when findings from it are generalized to a language or a part of it.
Second, as in any type of quantitative analysis, the variables should be measured and coded accurately and consistently.
A possible solution could be to insert these marking elements inside tags, something that the concordancer will be able to ignore.
This would mean that the hapaxes in any sample would overwhelmingly cease to be hapaxes -the larger our corpus, the fewer hapaxes there will be.
Here, sadly, the designers of the architecture have introduced a serious flaw in the system that may well affect the overall calculations of the collocation statistics very strongly, which is to treat punctuation tokens (and their types) as equivalent to words.
Exemplification throughout the discussion is based on data abstracted from the Diachronic Electronic Corpus of Tyneside English .
The idea is that a larger number of different word forms (types) relative to the number of all words in text (tokens) points to a lexically more varied text.
Another criticism of academic corpus studies is that, until fairly recently, these have been largely text-focused so that features seem rather abstract and disembodied from real users.
However, the keywords could be, say, pronouns if one corpus is conversational and another is from monologic or written sources.
The sample must be randomly drawn from the population.
If, on the other hand, as was my case, there is a lot of data available (the sample was approximately 200,000 words), the statistical approach is called for.
A project that considers how news writing changes in different time periods would, obviously, require a corpus that includes newspaper articles written at different periods of time.
Then, we characterize each observation for its features, which in this case would be syntactic position and type of article.
The corpus linguist says to the armchair linguist, "Why should I think what you tell me is true?
Explanations and examples of these applications of boostrapping in corpus linguistics are included in Sect.
In a written corpus, we can thus query the sequence ⟨[word="''"] [pos="pronoun"] [pos="verb"]⟩ to find the majority of examples of the construction.
A qualitative study on this same question would identify some examples of spelling mistakes and analyze in detail the contexts in which they occur, for example the grammatical category of the words concerned, whether they are rare or frequent words, occurring in a long or a short sentence, what type of phonemes is poorly transcribed, etc.
In the following I want to look at four studies that exemplify principles relevant to corpus stylistics.
These corpora are certainly impressive in terms of their size, even though they typically contain mere billions rather than trillions of 2 What is corpus linguistics?
In these cases, the most common operationalization strategy found in corpus linguistics is reference to a dictionary or lexical database.
You can continue to look for lexico-grammatical patterns that you find interesting, or you can carry out corpus-based studies that rely on the results of previous, corpus-driven studies.
The logic behind this principle was that the larger the corpus, the more likely it would contain occurrences of rare linguistic phenomena.
This handbook aims to address all these areas with contributions by many of their leading experts, to be a comprehensive practical resource for junior and more v vi Introduction senior corpus linguists, and to represent the whole research cycle from corpus creation, method, and analyses to reporting results for publication.
The proper nouns associated with chalet in the corpus show one of the limitations of the collocation analysis.
Since corpora are the only source for the identification of changes in discourse frequency, this is a question that can only be answered using corpus-linguistic methodology.
If the residence history on the biographical form is unclear, it is also possible to interview the individual afterwards, provided that he or she can be located; if the individual does not fit the criteria for inclusion, his or her text can be discarded.
While the chapters mostly concentrate on English corpora, many of the themes are relevant from a general corpus-linguistic point of view.
In a diachronic corpus of narrative fiction this inevitably affects the frequencies of specific grammatical patterns associated with either descriptive or more action-driven narrative passages.
Lexis is examined only insofar as it fits within the chosen grammatical description.
On the other hand, using such an editor would only allow you to search through, but not concordance, on the file.
Creating a corpus is a huge undertaking, and after texts are collected, it is very easy to file them away and forget about them.
A study that involves time as a variable is called a diachronic or longitudinal study.
His MLU ranged from 1.17 at the start of the corpus to 3.78 at the end.
After that I will reflect on the current state of the art in corpus tools and methods.
Further typical options include whether to consider punctuation as a boundary to collocation window spans or impose minimum frequencies on collocates or node words.
As the above discussion already indicated, however, the distinction between corpora and text archives is often blurred.
Flowerdew and Brezina 2017) and corpus approaches to language and cognition (e.g.
There are linguistic factors that need to be considered in determining the number of samples of a genre to include in a corpus, considerations that are quite independent of general sampling issues.
Due to these levels, it was claimed that corpus linguists give more importance to descriptive adequacy while generative grammarians focus on explanatory adequacy.
Having an annotation tool which supports a complex data model may be of little use if the annotated data cannot be accessed and used in sensible ways later on.
For example, 75% of the occurrences of plus au moins in the corpus should have been translated using expressions such as pretty much or somewhat in English, rather than using the expression more or less.
As a rule of thumb, however, the highest number of matching or similar metadata field values might be a good starting point.
As this is a kind of formatting that we'll equally want to apply to all such units, it would be cumbersome to have to type this out repeatedly, so we can take advantage of a feature of CSS that allows us to list the different elements a definition applies to by separating them from each other by a comma, just like in an ordinary written list.
So, if the occurs 60,000 times in a 1.5 million word corpus, its relative frequency is forty per thousand words, or 40,000 per million words.
The main upside of the combining method, when compared to the exclusion method, is that no data is completely ignored: all text available for the analysis is included in the analysis.
The results can then be displayed in the concordance format familiar to corpus linguistics with the search feature (e.g.
And, if you're worried about not being able to get an exact token count of all the data after making modifications, the spreadsheet will also help you there because all you need to do in order to obtain this is to place the cursor in the field immediately below the count for the final token in the list and use the AutoSum function (symbolised by ) to automatically count the total for you.
But corpus linguistics was not only developed thanks to the creation of such tools.
They tend to look at predictors such as salience, accessibility, referential distance, and animacy to explain the choice of one type of reference over another.
As a consequence, it has become popular among corpus builders to include material from online sources (see Chap.
Along the same lines, the next example does something similar but does not retrieve data values, but values of an attribute, namely lemma annotation.
In corpora, it encompasses properties of all data types, as well as data about the corpus as a whole and its creation process.
We have already discussed some of the challenges inherent in the creation of large corpora, in terms of accurate metadata and word-level annotation.
When compiling a new corpus, the task instructions and the input material should be neutral with regard to the elicitation of specific structure(s).
Still, an automatically annotated corpus will frequently allow us to define searches whose precision and recall are higher than in the example above.
Furthermore, the corpus text should be linked to the recording media of the primary spoken/signed text in a time-aligned format.
Some large corpus projects intended to attract large numbers of users, such as the British National Corpus (BNC) and the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE), provide relatively detailed reports online.
Our interest is typically on what we can say about the population on the basis of the sample -and how confidently we can say it.
Non-corpus-informed pedagogical grammars fail to include important information on the passive.
Imagine, for example, a text from the domain of finance about developments on the stock market, where certain values rise above/to or fall below/down to certain thresholds, etc., where the verbs on their own may not give us enough grounds to distinguish the type of domain, just like the verbs that form part of phrasal/prepositional verb combinations are often semantically relatively empty.
However, even despite efforts to preserve genre balance, any diachronic comparison across this timespan has to take into account that the language used in such a corpus changes from a relatively standardized written language with more or less direct roots in a contemporary vernacular to a functionally impoverished and much more writing-dependent language used mainly in religious contexts and as a lingua franca among European scholars and scientists.
Another possibility is to take a portion of a corpus and compare it to the rest of the corpus, or to compare a corpus with another similar corpus.
The BootCaT manual gives a simple example for the building of a domain-specific corpus on dogs, with the seeds dog, Fido, food hygiene, leash, breeds, and pet.
Finally, the annotation of a corpus represents a transparent process when it is well documented, which enables an objective evaluation of the data by the scientific community, contrary to other methodological choices which are often less transparent.
However, it severely complicates the study of certain types of research questions that rely on POS annotation, as will become apparent below.
While we will see below that corpus linguistics has a lot to offer to the analyst, it is worth pointing out that, strictly speaking at least, the only thing corpora can provide is information on frequencies.
Such situations also usually lend themselves to automatic methods; in a part-of-speech-tagged corpus, active and passive constructions can be searched for and counted automatically.
However, when this type of information remains unavailable, these gaps lead to serious limitations in data analysis (see Chapter 8).
The problem then is to find out the best indicators for identifying the similarities between an author's text and its differences with the texts of other authors and to later apply these measures to the controversial text in order to determine which author this text shares more similarities with.
First, we can rarely say with any certainty whether we are dealing with true counterexamples or whether the apparent counterexamples are due to errors in the construction of the corpus or in our classification.
The first type of explanation concerns the influence of the source language, which inevitably leaves traces in translations.
Section 1 presents some of the key issues in the writing of corpus-informed materials.
These vary in quality and it is obviously important for later linguistic analysis to check that the original text flow has been preserved, especially where the source has multiple columns or tabular formatting.
A well-designed corpus can provide representative samples of registers (see Clancy 2010 on representativeness).
In this study, each file representing a text written by a single author was considered as a separate observation.
Apart from that, diachronic corpora differ widely in size, composition, scope, annotation, and the nature of their textual material.
This brief overview of the current state of corpus-based research is explored in detail in this second edition of English Corpus Linguistics.
A relatively small set of words accounts for a large proportion of tokens in a text (or corpus).
Do we expect 800 or 80 verbs in a 1,000-word text?
We simply take the size of the smaller of our two samples and draw a random sample of the same size from the larger of the two samples (if our data sets are large enough, it would be even better to draw random samples for both affixes).
To do this, it is necessary to use inferential statistics, a tool that makes it possible to know whether it is correct to generalize the results found, at the level of a sample, to a population.
Because so much text is now available in computer-readable form, many stages of dictionary creation can be automated.
Results of this analysis demonstrate that the list performs considerably better coverage-wise in academic writing than in other written genres, in both in the academic portion of the corpus from which the list was constructed (13.8%), and a different academic sub-corpus from the BNC (13.7%) (compared to 8.0% for newspaper articles and 3.4% for fiction).
Third, in the process of corpus construction we have to think about the relationship between the population and the sample in a somewhat different way to how this is done in fields where sampling can be done on a random basis.
Of course, the question is how important the role of 𝑝-values is in a design where our main aim is to identify collocates and order them in terms of their collocation strength.
However, the choice of excerpts is often complex, since the identification of interesting characteristics to be studied in a text is not always visible at a first reading.
A colligate can also be a syntactic structure that the node tends to occurs within or alongside -such as a sentence position, or a verb complementation pattern.
If we do not find a word in our corpus, this may be because there is no such word in English, or because the word just happens to be absent from our corpus, or because it does occur in the corpus but we missed it.
In fact, we can select multiple reference corpora and carry out the keyword procedure with each of them and compare the results.
One of the key questions for Corpus Linguistics is how a corpus might satisfactorily be 'analysed'.
However, the use of adjectives is a stable enough linguistic variable, so there is no need to worry about the representativeness too much.
The corpus amounts to approximately 100,000 words but only part is publicly available.
Conversely, maison is associated with appartements and étages, which specifies the type of housing in question, as well as bureaux which shows a different use from that of maison.
Pasting the token counts from the 'Make/edit subcorpora' page also presents no problem because, this time, we only have one single piece of 'text' without HTML codes, so there's nothing to misinterpret for the spreadsheet program.
In another register, a comparison of the Le Monde corpus from the year 2011 with that of the year 1987 generates keywords in the form of common nouns such as euros, economy, Internet and international and proper nouns like Sarkozy, Hollande, Obama, Aubry and Merkel.
A corpus is a collection of a fairly large number of examples (or, in corpus terms, texts) that share similar contextual or situational characteristics.
The starting point for research is the corpus itself, in order to be able to infer usage rules from its content.
In the rest of Chapter 4, we will describe example studies from all of these levels as well as corpus studies of sign and gesture.
Does the genre of the small corpus affect the content words that occur?
In 2008, Meunier and Gouverneur stated that publishers seem to acknowledge the importance of corpora in ELT but fail to give precise information on how exactly the corpus is used.
The case study was also meant to provide an example of a corpus-based design where it is more useful to operationalize one of the constructs (Frozenness) as an ordinal, rather than a nominal variable.
The researcher's control over the raw data production moreover influences the degree of variation that is represented in the corpus.
Headings fulfil multiple functions in a text.
Conversely, even the most sophisticated quantitative analysis typically entails item-by-item annotation of each data point, which equates to a qualitative analysis of sorts; likewise, the results of a quantitative analysis demand interpretation, which typically requires a qualitative approach.
Now that you have a basic idea regarding the formats and encodings a text might come in, and the issues involved in being able to work with them, we can move on to finding out how we can obtain our own texts for analysis purposes.
Other kinds of corpus linguistics are interested in variation between many kinds of register and genre, and often in the differences between spoken and written modes.
For instance, many of the corpus-based reference grammars of English, such as Quirk et al.
Second, such cases demonstrate vividly why the two operational definitions of parts of speechby tagging guide line and by tagger -are fundamentally different: no human annotator, even one with a very sketchy tagging guideline, would produce the annotation in (23).
Let us take a look at an utterance from the York corpus (De Cat and Plunkett 2002): *CHI:tu me l'as donné.
To begin with, we will see that annotating a corpus is a way of adding value to it by widening the field of questions that it will make it possible to investigate.
First and overall, frequency and association data were found to be reliable predictors of learners' knowledge of collocation.
As is often the case in corpus-based translation studies, parallel data are used with a view to identifying the source-text items/structures that have triggered the use of a given item/structure in the translations (in this case, the presence of a trigger term in the English source texts, such as unit, job, or team).
Likewise, for written texts, one can include the first 2,000 words of an article, which contains the introduction and part of the body of the article, or one can take the middle of an article, which contains a significant amount of text developing the main point made in the article, or even its end.
One example of this is Hyland and Tse's (2012) study of bios and how collocation allows us to see differences in the ways that senior academics and graduate students refer to themselves in the bios accompanying research articles.
A corpus that has been annotated with the needs of linguists in mind can greatly facilitate the exploration of such phenomena by reducing the time and effort involved.
The Brown Corpus marked the beginning of the era of computerized corpora that could be used as the basis for conducting empirically based linguistic investigations of English.
Why is it important that a standard system, such as the Text Encoding Initiative, is developed to ensure that everyone follows a standardized system of annotation for representing metadata and textual annotation?
However, they can be estimated with a certain degree of confidence from an observed sample drawn from the population.
But in research projects that are based on a specific understanding of Sex (for example, as a purely biological, a purely social or a purely psychological category), simply accepting the (often unstated) operational definition used by the corpus creators may distort our results substantially.
In this case, the corpus will be deliberately skewed so as to contain only samples of the variety under investigation.
In a study of that-complementation in English, for each hit in the corpus, the researchers considered external variables such as the L1 of the speaker who had produced the hit and whether the hit came from a written or spoken mode.
The guidelines used for the earliest English corpora compiled for linguistic analysis such as the Brown Corpus already observed the problems in the tagging of proper names.
It is written for someone doing corpus linguistics perhaps even for the first time and for someone who has limited or no basic statistical knowledge.
This is chiefly due to the greater costs and challenges in terms of technology and time that are connected with the compilation and annotation of spoken corpora.
Corpus creators need to resist this temptation and strive for a range of texts regardless of whether they can be obtained easily or not.
A text that is read on a web browser such as Google Chrome or Safari looks like this: You are not very good at parking.
Interpretative information is classified into two types: (i) intralinguistic information, which is linked with linguistic features and properties of a text, and (ii) extralinguistic information, which is related to information not linked with linguistic properties and features of a text.
Let us imagine, for example, that we wish to know how often French nouns such as ferme and car appear in a corpus.
This is easiest done by using the meta-information supplied by the corpus makers, which includes the category "commerce" as a subcategory of "newspaper" (cf.
Since it is not possible to include surreptitious speech in a corpus, does this mean that non-surreptitiously gathered speech is not natural?
Consider again the major difference between published and private texts: where a text is published it is fixed to some medium in some basic format, whether digital or analogue.
A very large set of questions in corpus linguistics can be answered without going beyond standard, widely available corpora.
We have highlighted tools and techniques that are already used in corpus linguistics that can be considered as visualisation: concordances, concgrams, collocate clouds, and described new methods of collocational networks and exploratory language analysis in social networks.
In addition to the genre-based specification, a researcher may restrict the corpus to a time frame, a social setting, or a given topic.
For example, over the period 1940-2009, 171 collocates of the node war were identified.
This part of the corpus contains a valid sampling of the English spoken by teenagers from various socioeconomic classes living in differing boroughs of London.
The ultimate length of a corpus might therefore be better determined not by focusing too intently on the overall length of the corpus but by focusing more on the internal structure of the corpus: the range of genres one wishes to include in the corpus, the length and number of individual text samples required to validly represent the genres that will make up the corpus, and the demographic characteristics of the individuals whose speech and writing will be chosen for inclusion in the corpus.
In other words, in the case of both royal and regal, substantial proportions of the occurrences of the words in the corpus appear in proper names, and it would be crucial to exclude such instances if we wanted to study of the use of the words as non-frozen elements.
Actually, TED Talks are always made in English; as a result, English is the only source language, contrary to the Europarl corpus, where all languages are alternately source and target.
First, corpus tools can be applied to individual texts, in helping decide whether a text is appropriate and what elements to focus on.
Therefore, its occurrence in two small corpora -a 55,000-word corpus of radio phone-in data and a 52,000-word corpus of post-observation teacher trainee interaction -was examined.
Another limitation of this corpus is that it is unidirectional.
If, however, the real proportion of condition relations in the corpus is 80%, the agreement obtained by chance would be 80%!
Quantity here refers both to (i) the size of individual corpora (e.g., number of participants, length and interval of recordings) and (ii) the number (and type) of languages we have data for.
Given this structure, the transcriptions entered in ELAN exhibit explicitly marked up structure in the XML output that can then be imported into other platforms and also is further analysed based on a more common vertical format, as will be shown shortly below.
Name several advantages and disadvantages of using a small, genre-specific corpus, and list possible research questions that could be answered with a small genre-specific corpus.
Again, it is the token frequency that is relevant to us.
Identifying tokens correctly and consistently in a corpus is another aspect of pre-processing and annotation of corpora.
Thus an interesting approach to deal with this is to plot not just one vocabulary-growth curve for the corpus one is interested in but, say, 100 vocabulary-growth curves, one for each of 100 versions of the corpus in which the words have been randomly reshuffled, which is what we will add here.
An example of metadata based on a questionnaire from the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE) is summarized in Fig.
The same applies to the compilation of a corpus.
The corpus is now available via the Ortolang platform, where it can be downloaded for free.
If a word is repeated, it counts as a new token but not as a new type.
The detailed presentation of the study begins by describing the corpus used and explaining how data was retrieved from it, as well as their annotation.
Corpus linguistics 185 convenience samples (cf.
However, ideally, describing the editing process shouldn't be the only thing you do in this respect; you may also want to retain a certain amount of meta-information about the compilation of your corpus, especially if your plan is to share the data with other people.
A concordance provides a quick overview of the typical usage of a particular (set of) word forms or more complex linguistic expressions.
The initially perhaps odd-seeming type sil is further proof of this, as it represents an abbreviation for 'silence', that is, a pause of undefined length, while utt represents markup for an utterance.
This focus is closely related to key concerns in corpus linguistics showing that frequent patterns are not necessarily those that language users are aware of.
The type/token ratio can also be used for comparing texts and their translations, only in cases of similar length.
Its wide temporal coverage and large scope of lexical types make the OED an ideal basis for studies that investigate diachronic type frequency changes in phenomena such as the way-construction.
If annotating overlapping segments of speech is done separately from the actual transcription of the text, the individual doing the annotation will have to go through the tape repeatedly to reconstruct the overlapsa process that could be done more efficiently by the person doing the transcription.
The article is especially interesting for its discourse-oriented perspective, starting from a rhetorical function rather than from one or two isolated items, as well as for its focus on scientific prose and its plea for more corpus-based English for Academic/Specific Purposes textbooks.
The conversation examples were extracted from the British National Corpus and the American National Corpus.
But what does this mean for our data from the BROWN corpus -is there really nothing to be learned from this sample concerning our hypothesis?
In Good for a genre-specific corpus, and a starting point for some research questions.
No baseline: we compare the observed frequencies of all individual words co-occurring with the node and produce a rank-ordered list.
For several decades now, corpus linguists have discussed dozens of association measures that are used to rank-order, for instance, collocations by the attraction of their constituent words.
All that may change in the course of documentation and analysis, and hence, a growing understanding of the data at hand are the annotations that make up the core of the corpus.
In these more complex cases, we can, and should, assess the quality of the automatic annotation in the same way in which we would assess the quality of the results returned by a particular query, in terms of precision and recall (cf.
As a good corpus linguist, you have to combine many different methodological skills (and many equally important analytical skills that I will not be concerned with here).
Linguists would probably agree that the design of the ICE corpora is "more representative" than that of the BNC Baby, which is in turn "more representative" than that of the BROWN corpus and its offspring.
Depending on how the tagging was done, there may just be simple categories such as verb, noun, adjective, or the categories may be more refined such as past tense verb, present tense verb, etc.
Let us test this hypothesis using the Corpus of Historical American English, which includes language from the early nineteenth to the very early twenty-first century -in a large part of the corpus, the twentieth century was thus entirely or partly in the future.
This is so-called sample standard deviation (SD).
The overall number of types (194,570, at least based on my token definition) is also fairly high, reflecting the variability of expressions.
For example, sidewalk is normally spelled as an uninterrupted sequence of the character S or s followed by the characters i, d, e, w, a, l and k, or as an uninterrupted sequence of the characters S, I, D, E, W, A, L and K, so (assuming that the corpus does not contain hyphens inserted at the end of a line when breaking the word across lines), there are just three orthographic forms; also, the word always has the same meaning.
At the same time, corpus linguistic studies show that very frequent clusters (more commonly referred to as "lexical bundles") are associated with discourse functions and so become important textual building blocks.
We identify and mark various rhetorical devices used in a text.
These, we can perhaps safely ignore, bearing in mind that the modals contained in them would normally contribute relatively little to the overall token counts of the genuine types.
When comparing two corpora, it often happens that a word that occurs frequently in one corpus is absent from the other corpus.
We likely can think of examples when a writer has either deleted or regretted a particular tweet, social media post, or text message.
The main advantage of downloadable corpora is their great flexibility for carrying out word or structure searches using a concordancer (see section 5.6).
In this way, it is later easier to combine them in different ways for creating sub-corpora, rather than having to retrieve text portions from a larger file.
In the classroom, there is plenty of room to negotiate and revise the text on the spot since questions can be asked at any time and clarifications can be requested.
Computer-assisted methods as such do not result in interpretations and the provision of data and tools alone does not convince the literary critic that the corpus linguist has something to say.
Clearly, these are not "established" in any meaningful sense, so let us add the requirement that a type must occur in the BNC at least twice to count as established.
The most common annotation is syntactic parsing.
This is why we should usually ideally also report the raw frequency and the corpus sizes along with any normed counts, which will then enable fellow researchers to judge our results fully.
Unlike the previous four methods, where some minor operational differences that exist in tokenization for frequency lists, concordances, keywords, and n-grams could produce slightly different results in different tools, the collocation method itself is less tightly defined.
When you paste the data, make sure you use the 'Paste Special…' option and select 'Unicode Text' (or 'Text') because otherwise the numbers in the frequency column may not be interpreted as numbers by the spreadsheet, but still retain some HTML coding.
Although we can get a parameter estimate from this sample, we have no way of measuring the accuracy of our estimate without knowing the sampling distribution.
Ideally, this would be achieved by truly random sampling 10 where each text ever produced and each spoken interaction that has ever taken place would have the same chance of appearing in the sample.
We may also want to use mode and medium when referring to different types of written language found on the internet or cellular phones (such as social media posts, tweets, and text messages), which vary in grades of permanence depending on the topic and potential effect they have.
Linguistic transcriptions are more or less exact renditions of spoken texts and constitute one form of linguistic annotations which will be discussed in Chapter 7 on annotation.
But what is the difference, what distinguishes these historical pragmatic studies from mainline corpus-linguistic studies?
A corpus can be representative of all the possible linguistic features of a language (covering all possible structures that are part of language user's competence), or it can be representative of all the external or situational variables of different texts that are produced in a given language.
Changing legislation in these areas might pose further difficulties for corpus-based research in the future.
The term raw data refers to the recording of a speech event or a written text, including its paralinguistic properties (what else is happening or done by participants about the communicative event).
Fortunately, corpus linguists who are interested in further developing their programming skills have an abundance of learning resources available to them.
Constructions, however, can be difficult to search for unless they have a particular feature or string that can be searched for, or unless additional coding or annotation has already gone into the corpus, for example, in the form of GRAID annotations mentioned in 10.3.1 that enable searches for different types of clause constructions including the distinction between intransitive, (mono-) transitive, and ditransitive clause constructions.
At least with respect to a register functional approach, any feature that is identified through a corpus-driven approach will still merit closer scrutiny and analysis in the corpus.
Israel's study demonstrates that the OED, with its database of precisely dated quotations, is a highly useful resource for corpus linguists.
For instance, the opening of the section in ECL1 on "Structural Markup" makes reference to ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) text formats and standard generalized markup language (SGML).
This parameter reflects the way in which word occurrences are distributed across the different portions of the corpus.
Unfortunately, such calculations presuppose that one knows precisely what linguistic constructions will be studied in a corpus.
Following this procedure, the sample corresponding to the first 18-year-old male participant from Marseille registered in the corpus would be saved in a file called "221001.txt".
However, such exact frequencies do not advance the analysis meaningfully: as long as we do not know how frequent a particular phenomenon is in the corpus as a whole, we cannot determine whether it is a characteristic property of the expression under investigation, or just an accidental one.
Although far less common, a corpus-based approach to data collection also has several advantages, including allowing for dialectologists to collect large amounts of data from a large number of informants, observe dialect variation across a range of communicative situations, and analyze quantitative linguistic variation in large samples of natural language.
We have also seen that corpus linguistics often resorts to a quantitative methodology, studying a large sample of data which is representative of the phenomenon studied, with the aim of generalizing the observations to the whole of the language or to a language's register.
Another type of meta-information is represented by a table of contents (in the front matter) or an index (in the back matter) of a scholarly book, where the meta-information serves as a kind of navigational aid in accessing individual parts of the book, and where the information is clearly linked to the content -or organisation thereof -itself.
If the corpus has been annotated, this command also makes it possible to search for grammatical categories, speech acts or even errors.
Yet, in order to ascertain the 'spokenness' of a text/corpus until such time, we may often want to handle contractions as single units.
Then, they analyzed the occurrences of these words one by one using the concordance file (see Chapter 5, section 5.7).
The genre features found in a piece of fiction can also be used to extend an argument regarding the intertextual properties of a text in such a way that the intellectual context of the writing can be connected to the written text.
While it is true that a sample is expected to bring together a rather restricted version of the overall population, it should also reproduce its main features so that the results obtained on this sample can be extended to the entire population.
If you sort our data in descending order, all the types that only occur in the first corpus will automatically appear at the top, due to the division by 0 error I referred to in the instructions.
Based on the results of this comparison, each text receives a new, scaled value, which is a representation of how typical the text is in terms of the range of variation seen in all texts of the exact same length.
The metadata of such a corpus should at least include information of where the recording took place, its date, the context in which it happened, the conversation topic, the number of participants, the gender of the person recorded, his/her age and profession.
That is, let's say Text 1 has 45 first person pronouns, and it is 1,553 words long.
Two words with the same frequency might occur often only in a handful of texts, or more consistently across the entire corpus.
We can call the first of these passive types, the long passive (a passive sentence that includes the "by phrase"), and the second type, the short passive (a passive sentence without the "by phrase").
Phenomena that can be researched with three text archives / Web 1.4.
In a certain study titled "Corpus Linguistics and its Applications in Higher Education" by Fuster Márquez & Clavel Arroitia (2010), they are set out to depict implied essentials of corpus linguistics and its progress in relevance to theoretical linguistics and its implementations in modern teaching pursuits.
These non-primed comparatives are fairly evenly distributed -194 are analytic comparatives and 187 are synthetic, which is not significantly different from a chance distribution (𝜒 2 = 0.13, df = 1, 𝑝 = 0.7199), suggesting that our sample of adjectives does indeed consist of cases that are fairly evenly distributed across the two comparative strategies (see Supplementary Online Material for the complete annotated concordance).
It is necessary to neutralize the differences in the type of data used in order to bring out the differences between languages.
In some cases, you may use the internet for the texts to include in your corpus.
Worse, developers might even discontinue the development of a tool altogether -and let us not even consider how sorry the state of the discipline of corpus linguistics would be if a majority of its practitioners was dependent on not even a handful of ready-made corpus tools and websites that allow you to search a corpus online.
Collocation in the broadest sense means simply those aspects of a word's meaning which subsist in its relationship with other words alongside which it tends to occur.
Examples for synchronic English data include the Open American National Corpus for spoken and written American English, as well as the ENCOW corpus for World Englishes as used on the web.
Needless to say, corpus linguistic studies of this sort cannot explain why languages opt for one or the other type of subject and object encoding, and the explanation for this lies in deep and intricate histories of language evolution with many stages of development, each a story worth telling in itself.
The major drawback of these interfaces is that they do not authorize any type of search.
In fact, interpreting other people's utterances, as we must do in corpus linguistic research, may actually lead to more intersubjectively stable results, as interpreting other people's utterances is a more natural activity than interpreting our own: the former is what we routinely engage in in communicative situations, the latter, while not exactly unnatural, is a rather exceptional activity.
As noted in Section 6.6.1, this is an extremely conservative correction that might make it quite difficult for any given collocation to reach significance.
Again the POS-tagged VOICE corpus clarifies the situation.
Because token counts differ from tool to tool we should also provide details about the tool and/or how the token count was arrived at.
And if a corpus has been lexically tagged, concordancing programs can retrieve various grammatical structures: lexical items, such as nouns or verbs; phrases, such as noun phrases or verb phrases; and clauses, such as relative clauses or adverbial clauses.
This type of information is highly useful, as it not only makes it possible to study and compare different types of narrative, but it also shows how the corpus is balanced (or not) with respect to type of narrative.
For example, good practice for building a corpus is to accurately document the type of language it contains.
However, in order to be interpreted, a document marked up in XML coding must follow certain syntax, in the form of a document type definition (DTD), which specifies the list of tags with their potential attributes, as well as the possible order of appearance for tags.
This can be measured thanks to the type/token ratio (see Chapter 8).
However, it is much more likely that we will be interested in large sets of collocate pairs, such as all adjective-noun pairs or even all word pairs in a given corpus.
However, for corpus linguists, such datasets can provide some of the crucial context that would allow them to contextualise their observations.
The main options (there are others) include range (R), percentage range (R%), population standard deviation (SD p ), sample standard deviation (SD), coefficient of variation (CV), percentage coefficient of variation (CV%), Juilland's D and DP.
All text samples should be collected from genuine use of speech and writing.
We must consider the issue of how representative the corpus is of that language or variety, based on the decisions that were made about what to include and what to exclude in that corpus.
Since there are several methods for data sampling to ensure the optimum representation of texts in a corpus, we may pre-define the kind of data we want to study before we define a sampling procedure.
On the other hand, if the corpus is intended to permit the study of discourse features, then it will have to contain lengthier texts, and some system of tagging to describe the various features of discourse structure.
We conclude by reflecting on the nature of evidence, falsification and corroboration in corpus use in the social sciences.
Markup has similar applications in that it allows analyses to take account of the structure of the corpus texts.
Techniques such as keywords help us to draw attention to words characteristic of particular texts or corpora that can be further investigated using methods such as collocation, i.e.
There is no fixed target user for a general corpus, as such.
A corpus often becomes a subject of quantitative and qualitative statistical analysis for addressing empirical and theoretical queries.
One of the most useful CLAN commands is the combo command, which helps you to look up words or word sequences produced by specific speakers in the corpus.
The concept of "local textual functions" allows a combination of both corpus-linguistic and literary perspectives in the analysis of clusters.
The book is aimed at a variety of readers, ranging mainly from linguistics students at senior undergraduate, Masters, or even PhD levels who are still unfamiliar with corpus linguistics, to language teachers or textbook developers who want to create or employ more real-life teaching materials.
Due to this fact, if you simply try to open these files by (double-)clicking on them, you'll usually get some form of message saying that your operating system doesn't recognise this particular file type, and asking you to identify a program to open the file with.
A request in CLAN should always start by specifying the name of the command to be performed, followed by the search elements, the file or file's name where the information should be retrieved from, and whether it should be related to the whole corpus or only narrowed to some files.
The word context here refers to something different from what we discussed above, that is, not the situational usage in a particular place and time, but instead the immediately surrounding text, something we can also refer to as co-text in case of ambiguity.
This corpus includes four original works in French and their translation into English, as well as four original works in English and their translation into French.
Thus, we can say that "the BNC corpus contains a significantly higher proportion of male speakers than expected by chance (𝜒 2 = 272.34, df = 1, 𝑝 < 0.001)" -in other words, the corpus is not balanced well with respect to the variable Speaker Sex (note that since this is a test of proportions rather than correlations, we cannot calculate a phi value here).
Report on the overall frequency of the keyword "way", its normed frequency, and its distributional patterns across all seven registers (as well as their use through time) noted in COCA -namely, spoken discourse, fiction, magazine, TV shows and movies, newspaper, and academic prose.
To illustrate this, imagine a different word (w 1 ) which has the same absolute frequency in the example corpus as word w (i.e.
It also includes a much broader range of written text categories than previous corpora, including not just edited writing but also student writing and letters.
For ICE-USA, research assistants filled out a written checklist supplying specific information for each spoken and written text that was collected.
We will discuss the different possible terms of comparison, depending on the type of research question being considered.
This is not to say that texts that vary in communicative purpose or time allotted to write a text are of different registers, but these contextual differences are likely to result in different linguistic features and that can be functionally interpreted.
In a first step, we have to determine the rank order of the data points in our sample.
The plain-text words of the corpus are sometimes called the raw data of the corpus.
This is particularly the case of requests concerning the attribution of a text to one or more alleged authors.
WHAT IS A CORPUS AND WHAT IS IT GOOD FOR?
Then, in addition, to make this procedure robust, we repeat the process for every possible beginning-point in the corpus (think about the corpus as a circle rather than a line) and calculate the mean of all the reduced frequency values that we get via the procedure described above.
If we accept graphemic or even orthographic representations of language (which corpus linguists do, most of the time), then we also accept some of the definitions that come along with orthography, for example concerning the question what constitutes a word.
The SBCSAE and the LLC cannot easily be combined into a larger corpus, since they mark prosodic features at very different levels of detail.
At the same time, however, given that documentations target languages that are not known to a wider scientific community, a greater minimum of annotation is key for documentation corpora, as will be discussed further in 10.3 (cf.
Ratio: Selected words had to occur at a rate 50% higher (i.e., at 1.5 the 'expected' rate of occurrence) in their academic corpus than in a nonacademic corpus (the rest of COCA).
Also move the full copy of the Sherlock Holmes text here.
While it is not implausible to analyze culture in general on the basis of a literary corpus, any analysis that involves the area of publishing itself will be particularly convincing.
Such a scenario also provides some flexibility in working with pre-compiled corpora, as we are not at the mercy of the corpus creators with regard to the composition of the corpus.
By training computer algorithms on extensive corpora, researchers have been able to develop language models that possess the ability to understand and generate text that resembles human language.
Some collocation measures such as MI highlight rare exclusivity of the collocational relationship, favouring collocates which occur almost exclusively in the company of the node, even though this may be only once or twice in the entire corpus.
Moreover, because the corpus contains private letters from a period before English was standardized, there is a great deal of spelling variation in the corpus.
The grouping factors derived from the structure of the corpus are mode (only two levels), register (five levels), and subregister (13 levels).
While many users of a spoken corpus will potentially be interested in analyzing overlapping speech, there will likely be very little interest in studying italicized words, for instance, in a written corpus.
As a result, in the twenty-first century, corpus linguistics has become -in the words of Tony McEnery -a 'killer method' in linguistics, applied to a hugely diverse array of types of linguistic research.
In the main text, things seem to be going better.
Tagging of contracted forms combines the two underlying word forms with a <*>, resulting in tags like <BHdem*VB+3>, where the latter part <VB+3> stands for '3rd person form of the verb be' thus differentiating that's from that.
The second corpus, the 12,500-word SettCorp, represents the conversations of a six-member (father, mother, two boys, and two girls) middle-class Irish family.
For instance, he considered such factors as whether the formality of the particular type of writing influenced the choice of either retaining or deleting that; whether that deletion was less common in formal writing than in informal writing; whether the particular verb influenced use or non-use of that; and whether including or not including that resulted in a difference in meaning.
The corpus needs to include different registers (e.g.
Another example is the EXMARaLDA tool, which has been specifically developed to assist in the transcription and annotation of spoken corpora, and later be able to manage them.
When you first start up the program, you'll be presented with an initial screen like the one shown below:   Don't worry if you open a directory and there may be files listed that you don't really want to include in your analysis -you can always remove them from the analysis corpus later.
However, the larger the proportion of the texts in the corpus which fall under the chosen length limit, the more problematic the exclusion method becomes.
However, out of the total number of hits of royal in the corpus -14,628 hits in 1,825 texts -it appears with a capital initial as often as 10,237 times in 1,603 texts).
For example, data for a study of student performance at university might include variables like personality type, degree of motivation, score on intelligence tests, scholastic record, family background, class, ethnicity, age, and health.
The situation has changed a great deal since the 1990s, thanks to the arrival of corpus linguistics, which made it possible to empirically compare linguistic systems.
This is not yet standard in corpus linguistics, but it is a good idea to plan and document your research as though it already were.
This puts a corpus ahead of generative linguistic study.
Next, the chapter explains the basic building blocks of all software programs, and then provides a number of criteria that can be used to assess the suitability of a programming language for a particular corpus linguistics project.
Because of the limitations of the historical data available, and because research goals are very diverse, there is no such thing as an ideal historical corpus.
Corpus morphology is mostly concerned with the distribution of affixes, and retrieving all occurrences of an affix plausibly starts with the retrieval of all strings potentially containing this affix.
Obviously, the larger this corpus, the more accurate the probabilities, the more likely that the tagger will be correct.
This ratio is notoriously sensitive to variation in the length of the text it is calculated for.
In other countries around the world, the situation may either be handled in a more relaxed or, in contrast, even harsher way, so it's always advisable to enquire about the exact copyright situation of the country in question, especially if you later want to make your corpus available to other researchers around the world.
In this section we outline annotation procedures that have been developed with a comparative perspective in mind.
Time-alignment means that the annotation -of whatever kind -is directly linked to the rendition of the speech signal.
And, to be able to automatically keep the turn tags separated from the text, we can add new lines in the appropriate places.
This study is a good example of how interesting and important information can quickly and easily be gleaned from even a small corpus.
While calibrating the performance of automatic tools is ultimately based on a reference human annotation, the question arises whether the annotations made by a human are necessarily 100% accurate.
In the opening section of the chapter, a distinction is made between the "armchair linguist," whose sources of data are essentially sentences that he/she makes up, and the "corpus linguist," who believes that it is better to draw upon authentic data as the basis of linguistic analyses.
In total, the WARD corpus contains 26,573,826 words, spread across 159,181 letters, written by 130,659 authors -which is a far larger sample than would be possible if traditional methods for data collection had been applied.
Again, ideally, a parallel corpus does not just have the translations in different languages, but has the translations sentence-aligned, such that for every sentence in language L 1 , you can automatically retrieve its translation in the languages L 2 to L n .
There are several types of resources, however, that it is good for any diachronic corpus linguist to be on the lookout for.
Note that, unlike precision, the recall rate of a query cannot be increased after the data have been extracted from the corpus.
Metadata may also pertain to the structure of the corpus itself, like the file names, line numbers and sentence or utterance ids in the examples cited above.
Sample B is probably relatively straightforward to analyse in terms of perhaps a frequency analysis of the words, but what if we're also interested in particular aspects of syntax or lexis that may be responsible for its textual complexity or the perceived level of formality, respectively?
It seems to me that, in fact, corpus creators are not striving for representativeness at all.
Becoming involved in a corpus creation project individually is realistic only in the case of specialized corpora, for example, if the task is narrowed to a specific language register or a regional variety, that is, a project of a smaller size.
We could now calculate the association strength between the verb and each of these nouns to get a better idea of which of them are significant collocates and which just happen to be frequent in the corpus overall.
The more convergent their annotation, the more it can be considered reliable and the divergent case can be resolved through a discussion a posteriori.
The difference is that in the case of semantic tagging, the tags represent semantic fields, i.e.
At a glance, it may seem clear that at first is an adverbial expression ("initially"), but with each potential phrasal expression identified an additional concordance of that item was run, and then it would become clear that at first also has non-phrasal expression manifestations, as in love at first sight.
Some corpora contain language samples produced by learners of different mother tongues, and this information can be found in the metadata (see Chapter 6, section 6.4).
This is true all the more so when we take into account the second level of sampling within these 2.1 The linguistic corpus genres, which uses a mixture of sub-genres (such as reportage or editorial in the press category or novels and short stories in the fiction category), and topic areas (such as Romance, Natural Science or Sports).
Next, I offered to check her hypothesis in the BNC, a corpus that samples both academic writing and fiction.
The words around the node are candidate words for collocates.
Second, when we analyse a corpus we must always be aware of dispersionlooking out for the difference, for instance, between a word that occurs 100 times in our corpus where all 100 instances are bunched close together in one text, and a word with the same 100 occurrences that are spread out across the whole corpus.
Since -ist is roughly equal to -olog-in terms of type frequency, let us choose this suffix for comparison.
Of course, we cannot 8.2 Case studies assume that there is an equal amount of male and female speech in the corpus, so the question is what to compare these frequencies against.
At the symposium presentation, there is a lack of spontaneous interaction, or immediate requests for clarification; there is no room for immediate negotiation of the text.
Finally, we saw that the creation of a corpus poses several ethical and legal questions which should be carefully considered, since distributing data amounts to disseminating information that belongs to and concerns third parties, whose rights must be respected.
For instance, consider the task of part-of-speech (POS) annotation (i.e., determining the correct POS of each word in a given sentence of a text).
Most people probably hear more language than they read; does this mean the spoken language should make up more than half the corpus?
In the absence of clear instructions they may not know, among other things, 4 Data retrieval and annotation whether to treat ligatures as one or two letters, whether apostrophes or wordinternal hyphens are supposed to count as letters, or how to deal with spelling variants (for example, in the BNC the noun programme also occurs in the variant program that is shorter by two letters).
We will use G through much of the remainder of this book whenever dealing with collocations or collocation-like phenomena.
A function to exemplify this characteristic that is actually also very useful in a variety of respects is sample.
One of the major issues we've repeatedly encountered, especially concerning the mega corpora we've worked with, is that the creation of large-scale resources may frequently lead to the compilers taking shortcuts when it comes to ensuring the quality of the data in terms of tokenisation and annotation.
Included within the spoken part of the BNC is a sub-corpus known as the Corpus of London Teenage English (COLT).
In fact, if metadata is included at the top or bottom of the file, it may be read as text rather than meta-information about the text.
These differences inevitably induce a certain bias towards specific text categories.
An additional index that is somewhat particular to the context of corpus linguistics and that we would propose to include in this list is normed frequency.
Corpus-based research has also made it possible to show that certain derivations deemed impossible from the point of view of theoretical morphology did nonetheless exist.
In the former, for example, arguing strongly and argued strongly would both count as cases of the collocation argue strongly.
The integrity and representativeness of complete artefacts is far more important than the difficulty of reconciling texts of different dimensions.
If, for example, a word list shows that one particular word is more frequent in one sub-corpus than in another (a corpus-driven method), then the researcher will still need to look at the distribution and use of this feature more closely in the corpus by investigating its use in some more detail.
However, as useful as an ordinary KWIC concordance may be, AntConc also offers us the functionality to create much better views of our search results by providing options for sorting the results based on their immediate left or right contexts.
The advantage of these corpora is that they have been designed to contain a set of texts representative of the language, or a part of the language to be studied, with a balanced representation of the different text genres, for example.
Finally, there are language varieties that are impossible to sample for practical reasons -for example, pillow talk (which speakers will be unwilling to share because they consider it too private), religious confessions or lawyer-client conver-sations (which speakers are prevented from sharing because they are privileged), and the planning of illegal activities (which speakers will want to keep secret in order to avoid lengthy prison terms).
The latter, however, is only shown if the option for this is activated in the 'Tool Preferences' for word lists, and a suitable lemma list loaded.
If a text is collected, and saved for later computerization and annotation, the individual who collected the text may not be around to answer questions, and information about the text may consequently be lost.
Even more strikingly, the structure of the type then I appeared 10 times more frequently in the COBUILD corpus that the I then construction, repeatedly employed in the declaration.
Words marked with the color blue are among the top 500 most frequently occurring words in the corpus.
In the written mode, an academic research article has gone through an extensive planning, drafting, and revising process; in a social media post or text message, generally this is not the case.
Other studies of lexis and grammar draw on theories of phraseology (e.g.
Clearly, it is, for all intents and purposes, impossible to include this variation in its entirety in a given corpus.
Inevitably, studies of co-text and phraseology are "messier" than those of lexeme and structure alone.
Further decisions of course need to be made regarding how much meta-information each file in the corpus absolutely needs to contain, or whether there isn't a choice to relegate some of this information to external header files (cf.
A very first step for a corpus builder is to identify texts that are relevant for the envisaged corpus and should be considered for selection or collection.
The corpus created in this way can be directly analyzed using the tools provided by the platform, for example, for retrieving concordances, word lists or keywords.
When you release the mouse button, the spreadsheet application will automatically have calculated and filled in all the relative frequencies for the general corpus.
If relevant, this section should also specify which version of the corpus and what types of annotations available with the corpus were used to answer the research questions.
Instead, it seems more likely that the construction is simply too infrequent to occur in a sample of one hundred million words of text.
However, when a certain linguistic phenomenon is not found in the corpus, it does not necessarily mean that the child or patient recorded in the corpus does not have the competence to produce such types of words or sentences.
This is because, due to their occurrence both in headings and the text, some of the key words that we find in the headings may occur with a higher overall frequency in the text, and thus help us to 'summarise' the content.
You'll notice that there may be a variety of formats available for different purposes, but the most useful for ours will usually be 'Plain Text UTF-8 '.
We will deal with data retrieval and annotation in the next chapter and return to the issue of methodological transparency at the end of it.
Here, the small subset of ECCO that has been keyed in manually by the Text Creation Partnership (ECCO-TCP), and which is hence free from OCR errors, provides an illustrative example.
But as corpora have grown larger, it has become a much more complicated undertaking to ensure that a corpus is both balanced and representative.
Based on a general corpus, we like to produce texts and reference materials that will guide in spelling, pronunciation, grammar (i.e., syntax), meaning and usage.
Go to the following website, which contains a much fuller description of the International Corpus of English (ICE) than the chapter does: www.ice-corpora.uzh.ch/en/design.html.
Most widespread corpus-linguistic software applications require that all information concerning, say, one particular sentence is on one line.
A completely different response to the issue of comparability is to create singlegenre diachronic corpora that cover relatively short time spans and draw their data from a single historical source.
We will return to this in section 1.4, devoted to the connections between computer science and corpus linguistics.
The practical implications of Zipf's law for corpus linguistics are as follows: we have to learn to critically evaluate the amount of evidence we have for our claims.
Nevertheless, there is one exceptionthe lemma flood.
We can also combine two or more attribute-value pairs inside a pair of square brackets to search for tokens satisfying particular conditions at different levels of annotation.
In short, corpus linguists were grouped into the same category as the structuralists -"behaviorists"that Chomsky had criticized in the early 1950s as he developed his theory of generative grammar.
Experimenting with the options should allow you to find that BNCweb also lets you list the PoS categories that collocate with the node by selecting 'collocations on POS-tags' next to 'Information'.
There has been little work done on collocation and semantic prosody in languages other than English.
Corpus tools and methods are now being applied very widely to historical data, learner language, and online varieties (Usenet, Emails, Blogs, and Microblogs), so I also consider the effect of non-standard or "dirty data" on corpus tools and methods, e.g.
Ideally, it would be desirable to include complete texts in corpora, since even if one is studying grammatical constructions, it is most natural to study these constructions within the context of a complete text rather than only part of that text.
Minor editing was required to format headers, footers and page numbers in XML tags, and converted n-dashes, pound signs, begin and end quotes to XML entities.
Future versions of this work aim to efficiently implement analysis considering the role of stop words in the corpus.
In this case, it is essential to properly outline the research question that will be studied on the basis of new data, since the latter will have a crucial influence on the whole process, both during the data collection and the annotation phases.
Systems such as Voicewalker was used for the Santa Barbara corpus and SoundScriber was used for compiling the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE).
For example, an annotation of discourse markers such as well, you know and I mean will only relate to these elements.
These studies set frequency thresholds and dispersion requirements in order to identify the lexical phrases that are prevalent in the target corpus.
For example, in the Littéracie avancée corpus, we can identify the keywords which specifically match student reports, compared with other types of academic work such as dissertations, by comparing this sub-section of the corpus to the others.
It is known to us that corpora can be of many types with regard to texts, languages, modes of data sampling, methods of corpus creation, manners of text annotation, and goals of text utilization, etc.
For instance, we might see the end most often at the end of a corpus of children's stories and rarely at the beginning or in the middle of the texts in that corpus.
A monitor corpus is a corpus allowing researchers to track current changes synchronically in a particular language.
With the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), though, workarounds were implemented that allowed users full access to the corpus without violating copyright law.
Another distinction that can be made regarding the types of existing corpora relates to the type of processing carried out on the linguistic data of the corpus.
Finally, we show that cross-validated results also allow us to employ a powerful model comparison method that helps us determine which methods are worth deploying in future automatic annotation settings.
Let's say we have the average scores for the use of hedges in our corpus of nine texts.
Corpus approaches to literary texts are specifically related to work in the area of literary computing or computational stylistics.
The text should be free from any annotation that carries linguistic and extralinguistic information.
In addition, corpus analyses have documented the existence of linguistic constructs that are not recognized by current linguistic theories.
In order to get around this slight limitation of AntConc, you can of course always use your favourite plain-text editor and do a search-and-replace operation where you replace the search term by something like >>> [search term] <<< (leaving out the square brackets).
Even if works related to corpus linguistics have existed for a long time (such as the indexing of the Bible by theologians or the file-based construction of dictionaries by scholars like Antoine Furetière in French or Samuel Johnson in English), this discipline was only able to properly take off after the arrival of computing.
They all seem to be from the same text, so similar considerations apply  Again, there are other clear cases of metaphor, such as [NP EXP burst with NP EMOT ] (line 30), [NP EMOT flood NP EXP 's heart] (line 31), and [NP EXP be filled with NP EMOT ] (line 32) (again, they seem to be from the same text).
This problem arises somewhat differently in the case of judicial inquiries, in particular because of the type of linguistic material involved.
For the annotation above, this table looks as follows: The two annotators converge on 13 of the 20 sentences, that is, there is 65% of agreement.
After the project began, it was discovered that not all the regional groups involved in the project would be able to collect all of the text categories originally planned for inclusion in the corpus.
Basically, this will help us answer the following question: do "corpus-informed" and more traditional grammar books present different types of descriptions of one and the same grammatical feature?
Overall, corpus-stylistic methods are characterized through the tension between qualitative and quantitative techniques.
These two sets of factors actually create a tension between the ideal representative corpus and a deviation thereof.
In Section 7.2 we present a selection of conventions for annotation that target different linguistic levels.
For these 6 Analysing Keyword Lists 133 languages, it might be the case that comparing surface forms of words from the corpus works less well than comparing lemmas, because the frequencies are too widely dispersed across different word forms (in a similar way to historical spelling variants) to be comparable.
Even if a corpus is basic, simply a string of wordforms with no other annotation, it is easy to search for individual words since usually words are a kind of string of characters, separated by white space.
In a small corpus of texts produced by 20 French-speaking students, the word nonobstant appears more frequently than in other language registers such as journalistic texts, but this higher frequency is due to the propensity of a particular student to use this word very frequently.
Thus, an important aspect in constructing a query is to annotate a random sample of our corpus manual for the phenomenon we are interested in, and then to check our query against this manual annotation.
Corpus-based research on grammatical variation is a wide research area, so the review we are offering is somewhat selective.
This method, probably the most widespread corpus-linguistic tool, is the concordance.
Given this assumption, the procedure described here clearly falls under our definition of corpus linguistics.
Note that it is not given that the results of a Fisher exact test can be extended beyond the corpus, due to the mathematical assumptions it is based on.
The users identified in this way were narrowed down to those whose free-text profile location strictly corresponded to one of the three target cities.
But while many features of writing can be annotated in a written corpus with TEI-conformant markup, annotating all of these features may prove to be unnecessary.
As a result, the British Library Newspapers database is an attractive alternative for the corpus-linguistic analysis of historical newspaper prose.
It is therefore crucial to the success of any corpus undertaking that accurate information be kept about each text to be considered for inclusion in the corpus.
For end users to make appropriate use of a corpus it is instrumental that they understand how it has been compiled.
It will be interesting to see whether some of the major insights generated within monomodal, or text-based, corpus linguistics will be replicated once we are able to truly analyse multimodality at scale.
However, it would be quite difficult to create the type of student specific corpus mentioned above.
The BNC, which is a paradigm example of an open corpus, hardly needs to be mentioned as it is already widely used.
To be representative, a spoken French corpus should include speakers from different regions, different ages, both male and female.
The concordancing program included with the Trump Twitter Archive is only able to retrieve individual strings of words from a corpus of Trump's tweets.
The first independent variable concerns the type of conversation from which the examples are drawn.
Finally, the corpus should serve as a linguistic study.
Of course, just because only text samples are included in a corpus does not mean that sections of texts ought to be randomly selected for inclusion in a corpus.
A study of the word (in either or both of its senses) would obviously require that we look at the lemma PAVEMENT, comprising at least the word forms pavement (singular), pavements (plural) and, depending on how the corpus is prepared, pavement's (possessive).
As long as it is not directly used for commercial purposes, one can utilize a corpus.
The BNC is a fixed corpus: its structure hasn't been changed since its creation in the 1990s, though a successor corpus, BNC2014, is now in progress (cf.
The indication is that the primary differentiating factor among the Gateshead speakers is gender, though the existence of cluster B suggests that educational level and type of employment are also factors.
Work in Corpus Linguistics has grown exponentially over the last three decades, and the quantitative tools it routinely uses have become more sophisticated.
This manual should also indicate how the annotation was carried out (by one or two people, throughout how many sessions) and whether successive versions were produced.
We could also, for example, create a list of the 2500 most frequent nouns in English and their Animacy values, and write a program that goes through a tagged corpus and, whenever it encounters a word tagged as a noun, looks up this value and attaches it to the word as a tag.
This corpus manual will usually be in PDF format, and from here you can always refer to any additional files for reference if necessary.
Because these processors generally parse the XML and often produce tree structures based on the hierarchy of the elements, they'd thus have rendered our sample in the same way, even without the additional line breaks I suggested you insert for readability.
We fed each tweet in its raw text form as a single sequence into BERT, which then produced context-informed vectors for each token in the tweet.
For expository reasons, let us distinguish between the rank value and the rank position of a data point: the rank value is the ordinal value it received during annotation (in our case, its value on the Animacy scale), its rank position is the position it occupies in an ordered list of all data points.
While it is worth finding out about each one of the programs on Anthony's webpage as they are very useful, we will mainly focus on two here, AntWordProfiler for lexical analyses and AntConc for lexical as well as grammatical analyses, as the most pertinent for your use when analyzing your corpus.
The primary goal of research in corpus linguistics is to be able to draw conclusions in relation to a linguistic phenomenon, not only at the level of the observed data sample, but also to generalize it to all data of the same type.
If you're only viewing the result in a good text editor, this won't really make any difference, but if you may be planning to use other programs to further process your results automatically, it may make a difference if these programs expect operatingsystem specific line endings, and thus potentially lead to errors.
In a general sense, a corpus can refer to any collection of texts that serve as the basis for analysis.
For instance, the first reference corpora (such as the Brown corpus developed for American English in the early 1960s) were about this size.
For example, if we wanted to compare the length of heads and modifiers in the s-possessive, we would have two groups that are dependent in that for any data point in one of the groups there is a corresponding data point in the other group that comes from the same corpus example.
To explore the process of planning a corpus, this chapter first provides an overview of the methodological assumptions that guided the compilation of two general-purpose corporathe British National Corpus (BNC) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)and two more specialized corporathe Corpus of Early English Correspondence (CEEC) and the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE).
Most corpus tools avoid the capitalisation issue completely by forcing all characters to upper-or lowercase, but this can cause issues with different meanings, e.g.
This is one of the 'beauties' (albeit also one of the pitfalls) of doing corpus linguistic analysis because it allows us to identify language features that we may never have expected to find, thus providing inspiration for further and deeper research into the regularities and irregularities of language (structure), which generally go hand-in-hand.
As we already have a basic understanding concerning the composition of the earlier, much smaller, corpora, we can now try and develop a basic understanding of how large-scale mega corpora may differ in that respect, and what the advantages in this may be, apart from simply having more text from different genres.
Options to avoid the time-consuming manual orthographic transcription are beginning to materialise: for example, it is possible to train speech-to-text software such as the one included in GoogleDocs on one's voice and then record oneself repeating the content of the raw data file.
This book is one of a series entitled Quantitative Linguistics, whose remit is to cover 'all aspects of quantitative methods and models in linguistics, text analysis, and related research fields', and more specifically 'the whole spectrum of theoretical and empirical research, ultimately striving for an exact mathematical formulation and empirical testing of hypotheses: observation and description of linguistic data, application of methods and models, discussion of methodological and epistemological issues, modelling of language and text phenomena'.
It is still common practice, for instance, to first retrieve data representing a particular linguistic phenomenon from an electronic corpus (e.g.
The term corpus (plural corpora) is simply the normal word in Latin for 'body', as in a body of text.
Paste the data from the general subcorpus into the cells below rank_g, 'type', and freq_g, and the other data into the corresponding rows rank_n, type_n, and freq_n, for now leaving the cells in between the sets empty.
This is both the exciting and frustrating part of corpus linguistics.
Throughout this section, we encountered various issues with tools and methods, again partly illustrating the effects of data where flaws in the basic compilation of the corpus may cause potential errors in the result, but partly also pointing out potential shortcomings in the particular tools at our disposal.
Although size does matter on the scale of the 'reliability' of a corpus, in reality, a corpus, however big it may be, is a small representation of the vast amount of speech and text varieties that are produced in a language.
This combination across three dimensions will therefore allow a user to explore the corpus on many different interconnected levels and visualisations.
The Sketch Engine corpus creation and management platform, discussed in Chapter 5, also automatically transforms the format of files downloaded from the Web.
The corpus builders have thus augmented the existing data by adding various types of information-about the speakers (sex, age, social class, region of origin, educational background), about the text (type of narrative; whether a stand-alone story or part of a 'narrative chain') and about the utterance (the roles of the participants visà-vis the narration; type of quotative verb used to signal who said what in a narrative; to what degree the discourse is represented as being verbatim or more or less indirect).
These corpora must also contain diachronic information, for example regarding the evolution of pronunciation from the second half of the 20th Century to the present day.
As numerous corpus studies have investigated the passive, we have selected that topic as a candidate for the comparison of corpus-informed versus non-corpus-informed pedagogical materials.
If our combined corpus were representative, we could at least conclude that neither of the two words is dominant.
Metadata can be used to limit searches to a particular subsection of the corpus, or can be used for examining variation due to some aspect of the individuals (i.e.
One of the advantages of this approach is that corpus can be exported by consensus: since the same tweet can be classified by different annotators, the number of tweets to export can be limited and retrieve those tweets that have achieved strong consensus among annotators.
What all instances of these have in common is that they contain some text, and that this text had </p> at the end, to close the tag.
In fact, most of the time, the study of lexicon can be done directly on a raw corpus, or in some cases, on a corpus that has been annotated with part-ofspeech tagging.
As a matter of fact, if a certain annotation turns out to be impossible to achieve in a convergent manner for human annotators, this indicates that the phenomenon may be poorly defined or that the categories have been poorly delimited.
Let's demonstrate this with the following example: imagine a one-million-word corpus in which we search for two words w 1 and w 2 .
The only thing that could happen is that you accidentally either delete an entry you hadn't intended to delete, in which case you'll need to re-run the concordance and delete more carefully, or that you may accidentally select too many hits before pressing Delete.
But as corpus-based research began to expand during this period, its emergence during the dominance of generative grammar in the 1960s created quite a controversy, since to some linguists, corpus linguistics reeked of behaviorism.
Often, however, such a search will come up empty, or existing annotation schemes will not be suitable for the specific data we plan to use or they may be incompatible with our theoretical assumptions.
Sinclair's pioneering corpus work was first put into practice lexicographically in the Collins COBUILD English Language Dictionary (CCELD), a monolingual dictionary for learners of English published in 1987.
The more frequent a linguistic phenomenon, the better it can be studied on the basis of a small corpus.
In the article, they describe (i) the extraction techniques, (ii) selection criteria and (iii) sampling methods used in constructing the corpus.
Because all statistical tests make assumptions about types of data (they are quite picky), it is necessary to decide which type the data at hand most closely correspond to, in order to choose the most appropriate test.
We will review the main types of existing corpora at the end of this chapter, and discuss the issue of metadata in Chapter 6.
No element in the corpus should make it possible to identify any participant.
A priori, it is possible to create a comparable corpus for any language pair, provided that digitized texts of a comparable nature are available in each language.
In the 1980s, the Brown-type compilation model started spreading to other parts of the English-speaking world (India, Australia, and New Zealand).
Such differences are important to understand for anyone working with the these corpora, as they will influence the way in which we have to search the corpus (see further Section 4.1.1 below) -before working with a corpus, one should always read the full manual.
Usually, these kinds of keywords are lexical items (nouns, adjectives, verbs) that give us an idea of the topics in the corpus.
In practice, more specialised annotation is restricted to special corpora created for specific research purposes, but some larger corpora fall into these particular categories; for instance, COCA is a tagged corpus.
There are ways to get transcriptions of spontaneous speech, but mainly from conversations broadcast on radio or television, a highly restricted type of language.
For example, most popular part-of-speech taggers are trained on newspaper text, a register which tends to follow fairly strict style guides and contain few errors.
Since they attempt to achieve maximal representativeness for a language, they add new texts being produced with the flow of time, such as COCA mentioned above.
Bootstrapping could be used as a method for evaluating the linguistic representativeness of a corpus (cf.
Each word in the COCA corpus is classified into frequency bands.
Unless we are working on a very specific corpus like the Bible or the complete works of an author, most of the time, it is actually impossible to include all the texts or all the recordings belonging to the genre to be studied in a corpus.
This part begins with chapters on the corpus-based description of spoken English, written academic English, and patterns of variation (synchronic and diachronic) among a wider range of spoken and written registers.
Making an LD corpus accessible to a broader scientific community is a key consideration.
Improvements in speed and usability of corpus tools are important as well as interoperability between the tools.
This research specifies that all forms of the lemma acteur will be retrieved from the corpus when a word tagged as an adjective appears to its right.
Would you want complete texts, or only text excerpts?
Often, especially at more junior stages of your career, you will not be in a position to build an entirely new, large corpus of a language, especially not if that language has a long research tradition and hence a large academic community.
Later, the results obtained on the basis of this sample can be extrapolated to the entire population.
Since the notion of word is a little ambiguous here, it is useful to introduce a common distinction between (word) type and (word) token.
The BNC is defined as "a monolingual British English corpus: it comprises text samples which are substantially the product of speakers of British English" (www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs/URG/BNCdes.html#spodes).
Usually, corpus software tools tokenise words by identifying boundaries with white space characters and removing any punctuation characters from the start and end of words.
This, however, isn't the only type of consideration necessary, but we also need to bear in mind ethical issues involved in the collection -such as asking people for permission to record them or to publish their recordings, etc.and which type of format that data should be stored in so as to be most useful to us, and potentially also other researchers.
However, this does not necessarily mean that the text must be excluded from the corpus, since there is annotation that can be included in a corpus indicating that certain sections of a sample are "extra-corpus" material; that is, material not considered part of the corpus for purposes of word counts, generating KWIC (key word in context), and so forth.
This is connected to a so-called 'whelk problem' (see Section 2.4) when some infrequent lexical items become dramatically overrepresented in the corpus.
From a parsed and glossed sub-corpus 2 of 8,961 words, verbs and nouns make up 5,375 word tokens.
We know that the maximum value of CV depends on the number of corpus parts and can be calculated as ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi no: of corpus parts À 1 p .
A synchronic or diachronic corpus is representative to the extent that the study of that corpus can replace the study of the textual universe it represents.
Because of the complexity of parsing a corpus, there are relatively few corpora parsed in as much detail as ICE-GB and the DCPSE.
For the purposes of your study you want to select an unbiased sample of 40 texts that would represent the population.
This corpus-internal variability should be taken into account when doing LCR.
The purpose of your search for keywords could be that you analyze a) what kinds of words surround your keyword, b) how they are positioned in the sentence or in the phrase, or c) what the frequencies are of your keywords.
To measure the style of a passage, the frequencies of its linguistic items of different levels must be compared with the corresponding features in another text or corpus which is regarded as a norm and which has a definite relationship with this passage.
Relying on frequency data obtained from a large monolingual corpus, it was possible to show that translated financial reports are less collocational than comparable non-translated reports, while translated shareholders' letters seem to go in the opposite direction: they feature stronger collocations than non-translated letters, often resulting from explicitating or normalizing shifts.
That being said, as we discussed in Chapter 2, it is difficult to identify certain pragmatic uses automatically by means of a corpus search, because these uses are not transparently linked with the linguistic form used.
A simple search for their occurrences in a raw data corpus will provide a biased answer, since these words also have other uses apart from being nouns, and these will be included among the search results (ferme is also a conjugated form of the verb fermer and car is also a coordinating conjunction).
In this view, a corpus consisting entirely of traditional narratives from a specific indigenous 'orature' is as much a corpus as a super-varied one covering a wide range of situational characteristics, but they will be amenable to different research projects.
The idea of such a concordance arrangement predates the computer by quite a significant margin and scholars have in the past created concordances by hand for significant texts such as the Qur'an and the Bible.
It is important to acknowledge that this does not mean that diversity and representativeness are the same thing, but given that representative corpora are practically (and perhaps theoretically) impossible to create, diversity is a workable and justifiable proxy.
Provided that you type the formulae into the formula bar correctly and select the right cells, calculating all the relative frequencies accurately and efficiently should also not present any problems, although, if you haven't used spreadsheets extensively, filling cells by dragging may take some getting used to.
By analyzing the recurring sequences and the keywords they contained, the author was able to show that these repetitions played a particularly important stylistic role in the novel (which also contains many more repeated sequences than other works by the author), and that these repetitions should be maintained in the translation in order to preserve the spirit of the text.
When describing decision trees in text, you can refer to the node numbers (found in our figure at the top of each section/bin of the data, followed by the number of tokens in that group) and the split numbers (the numbers at the top of the circles).
Just as with auxiliaries and pronouns, we also ought to be very careful when eliminating prepositions and conjunctions from our frequency lists because they may equally tell us something about the domain or genre of a particular text.
Let us assume that the corpus targets a size of 200,000 words per genre, in order to have a representative sample of each of them.
Although the use of bootstrapping methods in corpus linguistics is still in its infancy, writing this book chapter has given us reason to be optimistic about the future of bootstrapping in corpus linguistics.
Looking at the published corpus-linguistic literature, my impression is that for most linguistic phenomena that researchers are likely to want to investigate, these corpus sizes seem sufficient.
For a long time after the publication of the corpus in 1964, many people thought that 1 million words of text represented a general-enough sample to provide sufficient information about the makeup of the English language.
Plain-text editors usually save their files as pure plain text, often using the extension .txt by default, and the more useful ones also allow you to specify a default encoding (which should generally be UTF-8 these days to ensure exchangeability of data), run sophisticated search-and-replace operations based on regular expressions (see Chapter 6), do syntax highlighting for special annotation formats (see Chapter 11), display line numbers, allow the user to run word counts, or even set up macros, i.e.
One of the earlier historical corpora, The Helsinki Corpus, contains 1.5 million words representing Old English to Early Modern English.
We, however, need to critically evaluate the assumptions of the tests before applying them; in the context of corpus linguistic analyses, the assumption of independence of observations is of utmost importance (see Sect.
How should we ideally approach the copyright problem now if we want to follow the principles of Open Corpus Linguistics?
As we have discussed many times throughout the book, one can follow a) a corpus-driven or b) a corpus-based (often called corpus-informed) approach to linguistic analysis.
For instance, if one were to count and then compare the number of pseudo-titles in one corpus of 40,000 words and another of 50,000 words, the results would be invalid, since a 50,000-word corpus is likely to contain more pseudo-titles than a 40,000-word corpus, simply because it is longer.
The checklist for corpus-informed materials will be presented first and will then be followed by the non-corpus materials one.
Compared to, say, the 1980s or even the 1990s, there is now a huge and constantly growing number of studies in corpus linguistics that tackle phenomena of interest with methods that allow researchers to study the effect of multiple independent variables, or predictors, on the dependent variable, or response, of interest.
The absence of an annotation in the second slot is read as 'non-human' .
In addition to this, using such software also ties the average user unnecessarily into using often complex annotation tools that themselves represent a relatively steep learning curve, apart from further potential issues regarding platform availability and setup.
Thanks to the annotation performed on data themselves, it also shows that certain frequency changes can be associated with the emergence of new functions.
These come from two different speakers; three samples belong to one speaker, the remaining sample to another speaker.
Even if frequencies are similar in cross-corpus comparison, it may be the case that, once you scratch the surface and do a qualitative analysis of how the individual examples are actually used, considerable differences emerge.
This research focuses on the word rather than on the lemma in order to exclude the masculine occurrences, acteur.
For example, English -Norwegian Parallel Corpus is not available online.
By default, AntConc uses UTF-8 encoding.
We can be sure about one thing: these criteria should not be related to the linguistic content of the samples, but rather to a classification made on the basis of external criteria, such as text genres and language registers.
We do not have enough space to discuss the statistical evaluation and detailed results of this study here; suffice it to say that applying a multiple regression approach to the entire data sample of over 9,000 attestations, the authors found that intermediate-advanced German and Spanish learners rely on the same factors as native speakers do when they choose to realize or omit that.
Linguistic Annotation is more grammatical in nature, providing linguistic information about the various structures occurring within a particular corpus.
Introduction DOI: 10.4324/9780429269035-1 that linguists may have a hard time imagining, and corpus linguistics also has this kind of explorative data-driven facet.
It must be admitted, however, that the analysis of gradience is a laborious affair, and even corpus grammarians have been known to shy away from it.
While this means that it cannot provide reliable results in an unsupervised manner, we show that a coarse manual annotation -conducted on the automatically identified clusters of tweets rather than individual occurrences -provides an efficient way of eliminating false positives.
Following the same steps outlined above, choose a sample from another register -for example, academic prose (marked as ACADEMIC on the list).
A third major challenge to meta-analysis in corpus linguistics and throughout many other fields is that of publication bias.
Corpus designers need to actively seek to cover as wide a range of texts as possible.
In addition to grammatical tagging and parsing, it is also possible to do semantic, discourse, and problem-oriented tagging.
Only when corpus compilers have received the written consent of the speakers recorded for the corpus that their data can be used for research and be disseminated can corpora be used and shared.
The following code extracts the Kindlemma random intercept for item 99, which is -0.159 for the lemma Wasser 'water'.
Since this era, advances in corpus linguistics have resulted in the creation of many different types of corpora containing authentic texts ranging from spontaneous conversations to technical writing in the social and natural sciences.
The components highlighted as interesting from a linguistic perspective are features such as style, intended readership, intended function and the context in which the text is intended to fulfill a communicative purpose.
For example, a researcher who is interested in spoken workplace discourse could document demographic information about speakers' job titles and ages and whether interactions involve peers or managers/subordinates, and then include in the corpus a predetermined proportion of texts from each category.
Scrolling up through the document, find the end of the text body and place the cursor there, keeping note of the 'footer' contents.
By contrast, there are other configurations that are found significantly more often than expected in their respective corpus periods.
One of the simplest ones is to count the number of portions of the corpus in which the word is present.
Advances in information technology put computer power sufficient for the analysis of larger and larger bodies of data within the reach of any researcher who cares to use a corpus.
Since the late 1990s when linguists began to turn to the web as a corpus, search engines have actually become less advanced in terms of the options they offer.
And this is especially true when the corpus is created by a small team and with limited resources.
It is high time that this change and that corpus linguists make an honest effort to describe their designs in sufficient detail to make them reproducible (in all senses discussed above).
However, corpus-based register studies could have far greater impact than they currently do.
If you set the argument characters.around to a number greater than zero, then the preceding and subsequent contexts will be as many characters (as opposed to corpus elements/lines).
Further, a vast majority of the matrix clauses introducing both kinds of embedded inversions are declarative clauses (almost 90% in each corpus), which seems to indicate that it is the ("interrogative-like") matrix verb (not e.g.
One important feature of a TEI-conformant document is what is called the TEI header (www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ HD.html), which supplies Metadata about a particular electronic document.
That is, the distribution in the "sample" could be projected to the distribution of the "population".
Before these questions are answered, it is appropriate to introduce the corpora and data analysis method used in this study (Section 3.1), which is followed by a discussion of the collocation and semantic prosodies of the chosen group of near synonyms in English (Section 3.2) and a contrastive analysis of the Chinese group (Section 3.3).
On the other hand, it's usually important to make some personal information, such as the informant's age, sex, provenance, level of education, etc., available to users of the corpus, in order to allow them to conduct research of a more sociolinguistic nature.
In the case of corpus linguistics, data are collected in a natural context and then observed, whereas in the case of experimental linguistics, one or more causes are manipulated within a controlled context in order to observe their effects.
First of all, in order to verify that all occurrences found when looking for the verb to love correspond to expressions of love as a feeling rather than to modal uses as in the phrase "I would love it that you kept quiet", it is necessary to examine each occurrence and thus browse the entire text.
However, the creators of large corpora have agreed that it is very difficult to fulfill all the criteria to achieve a perfectly balanced corpus.
In being clear about what makes corpus linguistics distinct and what it has to offer, the role of corpus linguistics as offering one further methodological tool in the researcher's toolbox in the social sciences Corpus linguistics and social sciences will be easier to make, and the engagement of corpus linguistics with the social sciences will be more easily facilitated.
With a total frequency of 3,700, and a normalized frequency of 37.6 instances per million words, it can be regarded as a high-frequency word in the corpus.
Next, there will be a discussion of patterning, usage and phraseology in text.
For better-studied languages, we will often have at least some common-knowledge idea of attested text varieties, but corpus compilers will also need to draw on relevant findings from studies of text varieties (e.g.
Instead, what we've seen is that it's often also necessary to understand the nature of how that text has been produced to some extent, or which particular features the program that was used to produce the text may offer.
Second, texts, whether written or spoken, may contain errors that were present in the original production or that were introduced by editing before publication or by the process of preparing them for inclusion in the corpus (cf.
For most of the questions addressed by corpus linguistics, it would be impossible to search through a paper database, and that is why having computerized corpora becomes essential.
The type of English used in Britain is quite different from the type of English used in the United States.
First, it vividly illustrates, through the application of a corpus-based, bottom-up methodology, the close interrelationship between pragmatic function and context.
The latter is even true if we work with commercial corpora but make our concordances and analysis scripts available, as is increasingly common in corpus linguistics.
Another way to get a sizable amount of text tagged is to use the CLAWS trial service.
The exact composition of the searchable web is something we know surprisingly little about as a research community, making it difficult to assess the representativeness of our web-derived corpora.
We, therefore, take a melioristic approach where we outline ways in which corpora can fare better or worse in regards to representativeness, focusing on the previously mentioned corpus parameters.
Thus, studies based on such corpora must be regarded as falling somewhere between corpus linguistics and psycholinguistics and they must therefore meet the design criteria of both corpus linguistic and psycholinguistic research designs.
For this encoding, each PDV symbol was assigned a unique fourdigit code.
MET for the lemma mass; f1 = 46.4).
Delete the rest of the text, using the time-saving methods we learnt earlier, and save the text.
However, this approach was not scalable to the increasingly vast web and such directories have now largely been replaced by keyword-based search engines like Google.
The n-gram procedure was applied to the full text of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (one of the most frequently downloaded texts from the Internet Archive and Project Gutenburg) 13 using Ted Pedersen's N-gram Statistics Package (NSP).
The use of rhetorics is a common practice in text generation.
In other words, the answers to both our research questions (Is corpus use effective for L2 learners -i.e.
While an understanding of the principles, approaches, and advantages of using corpora provides the necessary foundational knowledge of this approach to language analysis, there is a technical side to corpus linguistics that is best acquired through practice and experience with corpora.
It involves the notion of lexical frequency profiles, which is a corpus-based approach in applied linguistics concerned with the amount and the kind of vocabulary second/foreign-language learners use in their speaking and writing (see Laufer & Nation 1995 for an introduction; Meara 2005 for a critique; and Laufer 2005 for a response).
These are small assignments which you should try to complete before you read on; answers to them follow immediately in the text.
Perhaps most strikingly in need of study are the longer-term or secondary effects of regular concordance work on language awareness and sensitivity, autonomy, motivation, noticing, and other cognitive and metacognitive skills, and so on; their virtual absence in the studies covered here is no doubt due in large measure to the difficulty of assessing such features over time.
In fact a concordance of restraint and another of violen* in an 8-word span of on either/both/all sides yielded altogether 18 results, all of them contained in the Podium's turns.
Most aspects of this script should be straightforward, given that everything happening in the loop is relatively simple text and data processing.
Even for single units that are clearly delimited by spaces or punctuation, we may end up having problems assigning them to one and the same type because of such issues as polysemy discussed above, but also alternative spellings (colour vs. color) due to dialectal or historical variants, typos (teh instead of the), or capitalisation/non-capitalisation.
And, of course, as the compiler of the corpus, you still need to be able to identify and possibly contact your informants later, should follow-up questions arise, so you need to keep a separate file that allows you to look up this information, based on the user codes in your data.
In other words, I use it as a superordinate term for text-linguistic terms like genre, register, style, and medium as well as sociolinguistic terms like dialect, sociolect, etc.
Of course, this script is not very useful on its own, but it can be extended to form the foundation of a complete corpus toolkit, as described in Sect.
The central premise of corpus linguistics is that all of the language-internal andexternal contextual features are relevant to the way that people use language.
For the genitive alternation, the text ID and the possessor head lemma are used as crossed random effects.
In conclusion, corpus-based research has shown that grammatical variation, like phonological variation, can be sociolinguistically conditioned.
At the level of collocations, the very fact that punctuation occurs with a relatively high frequency in any orthographically transcribed corpus like the BNC almost guarantees that it'll be treated as collocating with genuine word types, something that simply doesn't make sense because the semantics and pragmatics of punctuation are very different from, and completely incomparable to, those of ordinary words.
In the following section, we undertake a survey of some of the most important corpus investigations of phraseology carried out to date, grouped according to the considerations introduced above.
As a programming exercise, you might want to tweak the function such that it can have different numbers of collocates on the left and on the right; • an argument desired.min, which indicates the earliest vector position you might want as collocate slots (the default is of course 1, the first word slot in the corpus (file)); • an argument desired.max, which indicates the last vector position you might want as collocate slots (the default is the maximum of positions, but you should set it to the length of the vector of words that you will subset so that the last word in the corpus (file) could be shown as a collocate)); • two more arguments padded and with.center, which you usually shouldn't need to change from their default setting of TRUE, which is why I will not explain them hereplay around with them if you want to get to know them.
But one issue that has not been discussed so far concerns the linguistic backgrounds of those whose speech or writing has been included in a corpus.
For many LD corpora, it may be advisable to create multiple versions in different languages so that the corpus be accessible to people of relevant regions.
It then offers some strong counter arguments for why an understanding of the basic concepts of programming is essential to any corpus researcher hoping to do cutting-edge work.
Thus, a corpus with a greater number of different texts is likely to result in a greater number of different lexical phrases than a comparable corpus with fewer texts.
A selection of occurrences of the vowels to be studied, representing the different periods, should then be looked up in the corpus.
The search for co-occurrences to the left indicates that the most frequent elements found in the corpus are: leur avis (18 times), les avis (seven times), d'avis (six times), l'avis (six times) and son avis (five times).
Then, in Section 3 we take a step back to consider the state of the art of phraseological research in corpus linguistics, considering some of the core issues still being debated within the field.
As we will see throughout the chapter, creating a corpus is a challenging task and presents many difficulties.
For a long time, the rule of thumb for collecting a corpus was that it should be as large as possible.
Earlier computer corpora, such as the Brown Corpus, contained texts taken from printed sources, such as newspapers, magazines, and books.
To do this, they search multiple linguistic variables at the same time in a corpus.
For example, a corpus created for studying the pronunciation of vowels in Paris and Marseille and which has not been compiled representing a balanced sample of different age groups cannot be used carelessly for studying the evolution in the pronunciation of vowels between generations.
For example, to look for all the adjectives that are used with a form of the word acteur, the CQL query should take the following form: [lemma = "acteur"] [tag = "ADJ"].
Using an R script (R Core Team 2014), I extracted all instances of I and you (when tagged as PNP) from all 21 files of the British National Corpus World Edition (XML) whose names begin with 'KR'.
Whatever Corpus Linguistics is, it is not static.
The third component lists the percentage of corpus parts containing at least one match, which here amounts to 100 percent.
In addition to the corpus-informed books, we will also review four popular noncorpus-informed grammar books at this same upper-intermediate to advanced level.
Please note that the selection we've now created is deliberately mixed, and in no way represents any balanced sample!
This was a 1-million-word corpus of cybertexts collected from five internet registers: pop culture news, advertising, forum requests for advice, blogs, and tweets (Connor-Linton, 2012).
Finally, a search for speech acts communicated by performative verbs such as ask, request and promise can be made easier through the use of POS taggers (as well as lemmatization), since it makes it possible to perform searches for first-person occurrences of the present, which are used for communicating performatives.
But even more basic aspects of this example are not directly extractable from the corpus text; for example, the grouping of words into phrases: how do we know which words belong together, for example, her living room, and form what kind of relationships with other words and phrases?
TEXT and COUNTY are directly connected to SPEAKER, because they represent a particular interview with a speaker who lived in a specific county at the time.
Since these words don't actually tell us much about the lexical richness or the content of a text/corpus, anyway, they're often regarded as redundant and thus lists that exclude them, at least in theory, ought to help us develop better insights into the nature of any text or corpus under investigation.
On the other hand, this information is necessarily biased by the interests and theoretical perspectives of the corpus creators.
VERB lemma, SPEAKER, TEXT, and COUNTY are non-repeatable effects, as a second study relying on randomly chosen verbs, speakers, texts, and counties would result in a different sample.
Primarily, this difference is attributed to the ability of instantaneous revisions of the text.
We can search for a specific lexeme in a corpus and determine its collocates, that is, a list of lexemes that co-occurs with it.
To avoid this, for example, London Lund Corpus was created through the recordings of the participants who were not informed before the recording process.
Modern technology allows one to store a corpus in such a manner that one can easily retrieve data from it.
PDFs, on the other hand, may present more of a problem as, due to their graphical nature, it's unavoidable that we'll end up with unwanted line breaks within paragraphs which probably need to be replaced by spaces manually as and when appropriate to avoid complications when trying to create frequency lists or otherwise processing the text documents later.
We have a sample, for instance, of 30 Matukar Panau speakers, speaking for a total of 40 hours in a specific setting.
Instead, they seem to interpret balance in terms of the related but distinct property diversity.
Put simply, if we have no theoretical model in which the results can be interpreted meaningfully, statistical significance does not add to our understanding of the object of research.
The non-native use of texts in a general corpus can have an adverse effect on linguistic analysis of data and information.
In lengthwise scaling methods, feature counts in each text are first compared against texts of the exact same length ("intra-length comparison") using some suitable method of comparison.
The Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) contains samples of academic speech occurring in many different academic contexts, such as lectures given by professors to students as well as conversations between students in study groups.
Perhaps the only major limitation here, though, is that the BYU interface only provides a single collocation score measure, which is MI.
To identify lemmas and lexemes, we first need to perform linguistic analysis of the text; lemmas are based on grammatical (morphological) analysis, while lexemes are based on both grammatical and semantic analysis.
Transcription of signed texts also requires conventionalisation of annotation (cf.
High-level, functional languages are well suited for writing short, simple, "one-off" programs for quick cleaning and processing of a corpus, e.g.
This function outputs random or pseudo-random samples, which is useful when, for example, you have a large number of matches or a large table and want to access only a small, randomly chosen sample or when you have a vector of words and want it re-sorted in a random order.
The problems faced by such researchers are similar to those faced by corpus linguiststhey often wish to characterise a population which is far too large to encompass fully.
More fundamental are matters of linguistic analysis proper, which present all the problems associated with lemmatization, tagging and annotation of synchronic data to a much higher degree (see Chap.
As mentioned above, Multi-CAST is available in various formats, and all data can be downloaded from the corpus website.
Consequently, there exist multi-purpose corpora, such as the Helsinki Corpus, which contains a range of different genres (sermons, travelogues, fiction, drama, etc.
What exactly you may need to remove from your data depends on the specific formatting or encoding conventions used for the document.
In any corpus, the greater the number of unique text samples, the higher the reliability of the analysis of linguistic variables.
Annotation of learner data comes with potential problems.
This is a question that is shared by linguistics and other areas of the social sciences, so it is perhaps understandable that annotation schemes are another area where there has been a flow of ideas between corpus linguistics and the social sciences.
Experimental studies also have definite advantages over corpus studies.
The Brown family corpora would all be synchronic when considered individually.
In addition to studying the distribution of word categories, such as nouns or prepositions, Biber (1993: 250) calculated the frequency with which new words are added to a sample as the number of words in the sample increases.
Broadly speaking, the most important question that we have to deal with when comparing two corpora is whether the frequencies of the relevant variables are significantly larger or smaller in corpus 1 than in corpus 2.
Furthermore, the question of sample and population is often quite complex in most real research projects and requires a lot more attention than what was given to it in section 6.
These contexts are not split further and constitute together a terminal node (Node 2) with 45 observations.
The MPC satisfies this criterion too: each sentence in the corpus was selected from some larger text of which it is a part.
In general, as the name collocation implies, we're here dealing with a phenomenon that describes which words tend to occur in proximity (co + location) to one another because they have some kind of 'affinity' to, or 'affiliation' with, one another.
However, random slopes (for situations where fixed effects vary per group) and multilevel models (for situations where group-wise tendencies can be predicted from other variables, for example when lemma frequency is useful to predict lemmaspecific tendencies) are also introduced.
However, since all texts in a normal-sized corpus are rarely close enough to each other in length, as a typical workaround, the ratio is calculated for a set number of words (such as 400 words) taken from the beginning of each text.
To a large extent, these are reasons why the corpus-based approach is not more popular in dialectology and sociolinguistics today.
As pointed out in Section 3.3.1, for most characters appearing in an English text, one single byte will be enough.
For example, the ditransitive construction appears as the pattern "verb phrase + noun phrase + noun phrase," but the interrogative construction has no pattern equivalent because there are no restrictions on the lexis with which it occurs.
This topic has been extensively researched in corpus studies and, therefore, much is known about the use and also the lexical associations of the passive.
For the purposes of illustration, all occurrences of the word love with their immediate contextone word to the left and one word to the rightare highlighted and the poem is displayed without line breaks to create one paragraph of run-on text.
While it is quite common for corpora to be lexically tagged, parsing a corpus is a much more complicated process.
If I am interested in how local newspapers in Britain discussed the issue of crime in the years 2010 to 2013, I will almost certainly need to build a corpus myself for this specific purpose.
In such cases, we might have to either fall back on commercial corpora or compile our own corpus.
However, if a corpus is parsed (i.e.
In this case, the quality of the automatic annotation is measured in comparison with a reference annotation produced by human annotators.
Moreover, you should consider differences in format: if data remain in different formats that cannot be combined for a search, then multiple searches will have to be used for corpus queries.
The size of each corpus constantly changes because all corpora featured on the site are monitor corpora: corpora to which new texts are added on a regular basis.
Even the resulting, somewhat weaker statement is quite clearly true, and will remain true no matter how large a corpus we are dealing with.
We will see that such variation can militate for, or against, interaction with corpus linguistics.
If every rank value occurred only once in our sample, rank value and rank position would be the same.
A corpus is a resource that serves a large number of domains of linguistics, language technology, cognitive linguistics, and sister disciplines.
The text in question is indeed a scientific report on fish populations: Fish Populations, Following a Drought, In the Neosho and Marais des Cygnes Rivers of Kansas (available via Project Gutenberg and in the Supplementary Online Material, file TXQP).
In order to determine whether priming occurs and under what conditions, we have to extract a set of potential targets and the directly preceding discourse from a corpus.
The 'n' here theoretically means 'any number of', but usually n-grams are restricted to relatively short sequences, such as bi-or tri-grams, because finding n-grams can be very expensive computationally as long lists have to be kept in memory, and their size grows with increasing length of a text/corpus, and each increment of n. Thus, if you're working on a relatively sizable corpus, be prepared to wait for a few minutes for n-gram calculations to finish.
If we are examining a series of examples extracted by searching a corpus, for instance, it is often very useful to be able to see, via the metadata, precisely what text each example comes from: knowing, for example, whether a particular instance comes from a novel or from a newspaper report can be a valuable aid to interpretation.
This is done by introducing codes into the text to represent the beginning and end points of all the phrases.
Below is a list of the nine most frequent words from the 2020 Matukar Panau corpus (150,740 words).
Many examples of annotation manuals can be found online and are provided with all the corpora made available to the public.
As we've seen before, this makes a lot of sense because it not only allows us to distinguish features on different linguistic levels more easily, actually making them countable, but also to possibly exclude some parts of the data from our specific analyses, for instance by ensuring that we don't perform n-gram/collocation analyses across syntactic boundaries.
Thus, more standardization, also linking to standards existing in other corners of corpus linguistics, seems an indispensable step for exploiting the full range of developmental data that we have.
One of the reasons behind building a general corpus is to enable scholars to analyze 'standards' to see what does occur and what does not than looking into non-standard interpolations.
This in itself would be surprising if intuited judgments were indeed superior to corpus evidence: after all, the distinction between linguistic behavior and linguistic knowledge is potentially relevant in other areas of linguistic inquiry, too.
Another way of dealing with the copyright problem during corpus distribution would be to allow users to search for concordances in the corpus, but not to visualize it in its entirety.
The purpose of the brief description is to point you to a way forward if you become interested in this type of research.
On top of that, being a monitor corpus, it also makes it possible to track potential changes across different periods in the same way.
Gippert 2006 for a discussion of textual encoding of language documentations and Seifart 2006 for a discussion of orthography development).
However, syntactic annotation tools are still imperfect and sometimes too complex to implement or use.
For example, Brat is an online tool that makes it possible to annotate not only entities in a corpus, but also the relations between them.
The following sections highlight key advancements within corpus linguistics on the study of speech, starting with characteristics that differentiate speech from writing (Section 2), and then moving to characteristics of particular spoken registers (Section 3), and specific individual features associated with speech (Section 4).
Likewise, observing the type frequency (i.e.
There are many other similar cases in the corpus.
It should be obvious that we can calculate the mean length of words or other constituents in a corpus, a particular sample, a particular position in a grammatical construction, etc.
The second advantage of annotated corpora is that annotations can be reused later and thus add value to a corpus.
In a small corpus, particularly of an under-researched language, function words have an advantage because they are so frequent, and it may be interesting to determine the full range of their contexts.
In doing so, we will outline our own epistemology and suggest a route that corpus linguistics may take in debates around epistemology in the social sciences.
A rogue value can be caused, for instance, by mistyping data in a spreadsheet or by a tagging error in the corpus.
As an activity, compare multiple English corpora, such as the COCA or COHA, or look at multiple genres within one corpus.
It is usually normalised by the corpus frequency (note that in scientific notation, e is used for very large or very small numbers.
However, what you've just seen on the exercise page is not only an issue in corpus linguistics, but actually represents a much more prevalent problem on the internet.
Although this measure may be useful in some cases, it is not entirely satisfactory, since it does not reflect the proportion in which this word has been used throughout the three portions of the corpus.
In addition, diachronic corpora only offer a list of certain textual genres, such as literature and legal texts, which also limits the generalization of the conclusions that can be drawn from them.
Each corpus developer is, however, free to adopt unique methods in language representation, text collection, and text application.
Granger's results are, however, disconfirmed for the corpus-informed materials as we obtained a clear Yes for almost 70 percent of the cells on the checklist.
The command also helps you to calculate the type/token ratio (see Chapter 8), which represents a measure of lexical diversity.
This differentiation of corpus types goes hand in hand with specific research goals as we will see.
Studies in lexical grammar are currently pulling in two directions, and any research project has to find a balance between the two.
For instance, you might have noticed that the spoken dialogue (Excerpt A) uses shorter syntactic structures (so called utterances) than the academic text (Excerpt B), which employs relatively long and complex sentences.
The results showed that both experimental and control groups made significant and substantial pre-post gains on the definitional measures (4 to 8 percent), but only concordancers made significant gains on the novel-text/gap-fill measure.
Linguistic annotation: The process of annotating a corpus involves running software that can (1) tag a corpus (add part-of-speech tags to all of the words in the corpus, such as nouns, prepositions, and verbs), or (2) parse a corpus (add markup that identifies larger structures, such as verb phrases, prepositional phrases, and adverbials).
The authors then retrieved certain keywords from the Oxford Children Corpus in order to compare them with those in the Oxford English Corpus, containing texts intended for adults.
Corpus linguistics is not a 'new area' of language study; it is a 'new approach' (or a new method) to language study.
Section 4 concludes the paper by bringing the two strands of the discussion together by showing how Open Corpus Linguistics can contribute to overcome several widely discussed problems in corpus linguistics.
On the contrary, the disadvantages of one type can often be counterbalanced, at least partly, by the advantages of the other, and vice versa.
While a text is being worked on at a particular stage of analysis, it receives an additional file extension to indicate that work on the text is in progress.
Indeed, a closer inspection of this word confirms that flood occurs mainly in one genre-based part of the corpus representing the official documents.
The case study also demonstrates the importance of corpora in diachronic research, a field of study which, as mentioned in Chapter 1 has always relied on citations drawn from authentic texts, but which can profit from querying large collections of such texts and quantifying the results.
For Step 3, make sure that you are still using the COCA corpus and have selected "chart" in the search.
However, a semantic annotation of verb types could differentiate their aspect (state or event verbs).
That said, our analysis identified clear trends regarding the use of semantic shifts based on a large amount of data, further confirming the potential that corpus-based analyses have in understanding the patterns behind complex linguistic behaviors.
For the moment, the important point to bear in mind is that corpus linguistics often resorts to a quantitative methodology (see section 1.5) so as to be able to generalize the conclusions observed on the basis of a linguistic sample to the whole of the language, or belonging to a particular language register.
If, for example, we have a corpus line which matches a particular search pattern more than once, then, as corpus linguists, we often would not just want one long match (with unwanted material in the middle): Why don't we want this behavior?
For each occurrence, the pronunciation should be noted, either by a phonetic analysis of the production of the vowel or by a manual annotation carried out by two native speakers.
The presence of proper nouns in the keyword lists is very frequent because these words often specifically refer to a particular person, which is not used equally in different corpora.
Not all of these forms increase in frequency, and those that do, notably need to and want to, are relatively low in text frequency and hence do not match the declining numbers of core modals such as will or would.
Even our definition of corpus linguistics makes reference to this fact when it states that research questions should be framed such that it enables us to answer them by looking at the distribution of linguistic phenomena across different conditions.
And as Furthermore, if the lexicographer desires a copy of the sentence in which a word occurs, it can be automatically extracted from the text and stored in a file, making obsolete the handwritten citation slip stored in a filing cabinet.
On the one hand, this definition subsumes the previous two definitions: If we assume that corpus linguistics is essentially the study of the distribution of linguistic phenomena in a linguistic corpus, we immediately understand the central role of the techniques described above: (i) KWIC concordances are a way of displaying the distribution of an expression across different syntagmatic contexts; (ii) collocation tables summarize the distribution of lexical items with respect to other lexical items in quantitative terms, and (iii) frequency lists summarize the overall quantitative distribution of lexical items in a given corpus.
An early corpus of spoken British English, the London-Lund Corpus, contains 5,000-word samples.
Corpus users are probably well aware that items found in proper names -for example, words found in titles of books, articles, films, etc.
Some researchers have gone further still, dismissing the notion that representativeness is achievable or important in web corpora.
A corpus of 100-articles would suffice for meeting a hypothetical 85% threshold for a list of 750 words, and that level of reliability could be achieved even for a full 1,000 words with corpora of ≥ 200-articles.
In this case, it is rare to be able to rely on automatic annotation tools.
The study is also a good example of how corpus techniques can be used to map patterns in a large collection of texts, identifying moves in different genres, comparing frequencies of various language features, and offering detailed description of how individual words and phrases are used.
But in order for this technique to work, it is crucial to carefully choose the sample of respondents, in such a way that it represents the whole population.
Second, a corpus can contain either complete texts (e.g.
This database also provides access to the Corpus représentatif des premiers texts français or CORPTEF, which brings together texts from the 9th to the 12th Centuries, and to the Passage du latin au français corpus or PALAFRALAT, which aims to document the linguistic transitions between Latin and French.
If spoken material is to be included in the corpus, it needs to be transcribed, that is, rendered in written form to be searchable by computer.
In BNCweb, even being able to do this is only possible because the whole corpus is marked up for s-units.
Is a given type borrowed or natively derived?
In this section, we will illustrate these types of annotation and discuss their practical implications as well as their relation to the criterion of authenticity, beginning with paralinguistic features, whose omission was already hinted at as a problem for authenticity in Section 2.1.1 above.
Unfortunately, though, there's no facility for creating n-gram lists, probably because these could potentially get very large, working with such a big corpus.
In Section 2, the focus is on part-of-speech (POS) annotation, which can be regarded as one of the most useful kinds of linguistic annotation in contemporary research, but which, as we shall see, does not come without problems.
In Notepad++, you can also specify the default encoding for any files you create under 'Settings→Preferences→New Document', where I'd recommend you set the option for 'UTF-8 without BOM', as well as use the additional setting 'Apply to opened ANSI files'.
Even if an automatically annotated corpus is unlikely to meet all the expectations of a researcher in terms of its categories of annotation, it can still be an invaluable resource.
AntConc can also read XML files, since these contain text which is accompanied by tags.
The hallmark of a corpusbased analysis, as understood in this chapter, is that a grammatical phenomenon is studied in its entirety, such that all relevant examples of a phenomenon are exhaustively retrieved from a corpus.
The primary purpose of the annotation is to add additional information to a text so that future analysis and interpretation of a text becomes easy, accurate, and useful.
Second, it relies on the error tagging of Falko to identify grammatical and ungrammatical uses of complex verbs and to determine error types.
These are genre markers: linguistic features of genres are not pervasive, rather they occur often only once, in specific positions in a text.
Then, in Chapter 7, we will also see that in order to answer certain research questions, it is necessary to annotate the content of a corpus.
In the latter, these counts would be kept separate; • to account for possible effects of the evenness of dispersion of a collocation within the corpus, each item was also quantified with a DP value (see Chap.
This advantage is all the more evident inasmuch the same annotation can often be used for answering different research questions.
We use strsplit and unlist to paste together file names for results, save all results per programming language into a data frame with write.table and then generate a barplot, which we annotate with text and save into a file with png and dev.off.
A novice student of linguistics could be excused for believing that corpus linguistics evolved in the past few decades, as a reaction against the dominant practice of intuition-based linguistics in the 1960s and 1970s.
Each provides a different type of information about a distribution of values.
Note that Firth, although writing well before the advent of corpus linguistics, refers explicitly to frequency as a characteristic of collocations.
For the time being, it is not possible for linguists to observe how the French language works through the study of a single corpus.
To introduce more writing by females into a corpus of an earlier period distorts the linguistic reality of the period.
Our framework splits along three orthogonal dimensions: linguistic (lexical, grammar/syntax, semantics), structural (to permit sub-corpora) and temporal (for diachronic corpora).
All of the corpora in Sketch Engine that are publicly accessible and that are more than a billion words in size are based on web pages, and there are currently three corpora of English that contain more than a billion words of text.
The only reason why all of them will get highlighted in the sample paragraph is because the script that allows you to display them identifies them globally, that is, each and every one of them individually.
As such, the only type of information we could report is the frequency with which every variable condition appeared in the data.
Moving slightly further down the text, we can see that, again, the determiner "A" in the first section/chapter title has, again, erroneously been tagged as NNP, but what's more surprising is that the word "Scandal", which was previously tagged as NN, is now tagged as NNP, too.
Mostly these corpora are explored on computer, only 24 using exclusively or in part printed activities derived from a corpus.
Of particular interest is the sub-corpus from WordPress and Blogger, which includes 95 million words of blog posts and a further 86 million words of reader comments on those posts.
Representativeness, albeit also difficult to measure, may be more easily achievable, especially for domain-specific corpora or limited fields of investigation, because often there are relatively clearly definable criteria for what represents a certain genre of text or domain.
For this reason, many corpus linguists prefer to describe it as a 'methodology'.
In addition, some concordancing programs can detect prefixes and suffixes and irregular forms and sort words by "lemmas"; that is, words such as runs, running, and ran will not be counted as separate entries but rather as variable forms of the lemma run.
All of the tools listed require manual transcription, annotation and analysis of data: these processes are not automated.
However, while the statistical properties of language are a worthwhile and actively researched area, they are not the primary object of research in corpus linguistics.
This particular quantitative information about lexis and grammar suggests a complex interaction of grammar, lexis, register, and phraseology in relation to frequency (ibid.
However, if we change the composition of the corpus to make it more homogeneous, this ought to change very quickly.
But they are probably one reason why so much grammatical research in corpus linguistics takes a word-centered approach.
One might argue that this second step can be seen as corpus-based because it identifies features in the corpus that merit further attention.
In Chapter 3 (see Sections 3.2 and 3.4), we have seen contingency tables that were constructed for collocation and keyword analyses to show all possibilities (contingencies) of word (co)occurrence.
The PDEV is an ongoing corpus-driven project in which a procedure called Corpus Pattern Analysis (CPA) is applied to identify the various patterns in which a verb is used and then discover how exactly meanings arise from each of the patterns.
If the period coverage of a study is considerable and a great deal of societal or politico-cultural change has affected language users during that time, it is likely that registers will have gained new features and conventions, developed into other registers, been replaced by new registers, or fallen into oblivion; such shifts affect the comparability of period samples.
The CHILDES database also offers a section on bilingualism, including five corpora for which one of the languages is French, the other language is Portuguese (Almeida corpus), Dutch (Amsterdam corpus), Russian (Bailleul corpus) and English (GNP and Watkins corpora).
An important observation is that removing stop words is a compromise for the corpus, since certain word combinations are affected, especially those which appear together with the words in the list.
This can be very simple, like counting all the words in a corpus or a specific word within a corpus, but can also become very complicated.
And are animate and abstract 3 Corpus linguistics as a scientific method incompatible, or would it not make sense to treat the referents of words like god, demon, unicorn, etc.
Second, in terms of study design, we would hope for more longitudinal studies with delayed post-tests to balance the short-term focus on very specific target items often found in the work reviewed here.
By that I do not only mean that corpus linguists need to use more different statistical tests (while that is generally true, the choice of a particular test is of course mostly dictated by the particular research question), but also that there needs to be a growing awareness that some choices that corpus linguists traditionally make may be pro blematic and would benefit from a different perspective.
To illustrate the difference, here are two short samples that only contain the first hit and all associated meta-information: This first sample contains only the reference numbers, while the next one contains the full textual descriptions, where 'n/a' (not applicable) essentially indicates that those fields don't apply to written, but only spoken, texts.
Depending on their origin, this can be rather easy or more difficult: usual word processors generally have a text format saving functionality, but extracting text from a PDF file can be difficult.
The parallel portion of the corpus, Multilingual Parallel Corpus, contains texts translated into nine European languages: German, English, Danish, Spanish, French, Italian, Greek, Dutch and Portuguese.
We must therefore avoid using this type of measurement on corpora of different sizes.
For simplicity, and to improve readability, always separate each c-unit text from the tags by line breaks again, so that both container tags and text end up on separate lines.
In many cases, this piece of information can be obtained by contacting the corpus creators.
However, while type is a very useful category, it may obscure some meaningful differences, e.g.
Whenever possible, it is preferable to reuse existing annotation schemes and to adapt them to the needs of the study rather than creating new schemes from scratch, for which comparisons with literature could be difficult to draw.
In addition to bootstrapping the decision trees, random forests sample a random subset of the original variables (e.g.
In longer written text production, like a book, producers of texts may go through various rounds of pre-planning and rewriting a text before it is actually delivered.
Two examples will be given here, both using the Bank of English corpus (HarperCollins Publishers and the University of Birmingham).
For instance, how would you achieve gender balance?
The primary idea is that we should have a general corpus that includes 'benchmarked' and 'standard' data so that we can collect information about how accepted standards are commonly used in mainstream linguistic activities.
With parametric tests, like One-Way ANOVA, we can generalize to the population that the sample was drawn from.
Once trained on a particular sample of sentences, a probabilistic parser could then use that information to determine what the most likely parses would be for any new sentences it encountered, weighing the likelihood of different possible analyses in consideration.
Again, the example of bogus refugees is cited in this text in order to be critical of it, arguing that such representations do not help to support genuine refugees, although the speaker still makes a distinction between genuine and bogus refugees.
Ultimately, the length of a corpus is best determined by its intended use.
A corpus can be designed to be the key material for many different research projects for a long time to come, or it can be created with a single project in mind, with no concrete plan to make it available to others.
The notions of systematicity and objectivity can also be observed in the metaanalytic approach to extracting information across the sample of studies that are obtained.
Annotation, by contrast, encodes into the corpus the results of some linguistic analysis which we have undertaken on the corpus text.
Over the years, corpus linguistics has made progress in its home discipline by being results-focused and by spawning new theories that use the data made available by corpus analyses.
Before performing the statistical analysis (step 2), we need to identify a large number of linguistic variables in the texts of our corpus.
In written corpora, there is one level other than the lexical that is (or can be) directly represented: the text.
For instance, the expression talk about occurred 6 times in the corpus.
The special meaning of the angled brackets < and > means that actual less-than or greater-than signs in the text itself must be represented by the special codes &lt; and &gt;.
Furthermore, XML can not only be used in conjunction with CSS, but also has its own stylesheet language XSL, which far exceeds the capabilities of CSS in that it also provides mechanisms for transforming documents from XML into other forms of XML, as well as various other types of formats, for display and processing.
As has been observed, corpus linguistics is a fairly new and rapidly growing discipline.
This both makes it easier to type in the speaker of an utterance during transcription and largely anonymizes the data (given that the metadata are stored in a different file).
In direct commercialization of corpus, one should seek permission from legal copyright holders.
While this numbering system is unique to ICE components, a similar system can be developed for any corpus project.
It overestimates statistical significance (type I error) in cases where there is no real difference and the variation is purely due to chance; the type I error rates (false hits) ranged from 48 to 99% depending on the linguistic feature investigated.
They are also useful for carrying out some of the 'quick and dirty' programming tasks that a corpus linguist might need to do in order to get their data into a form that can be analyzed.
Depending on the target size for each genre, it is necessary to determine the appropriate size for each sample.
We will again play around with the fact that the BNC is available in an XML and an SGML version, but rather than, as in Section 5.2.3, have the user state which version is being used, we will have R load the file and discover it on its own and then pick the right search expressions.
Qualitative corpus analyses, as Hasko (2020: 952) comments, have a long tradition, dating back to the pre-electronic era.
For example, if words a and b occur 1,000 and 100 times in a corpus, a will be recognized faster than b, but not 1000 / 100 =10 times as fast but maybe log 1000 / log 100 =1.5 times as fast.
As mentioned earlier, this type of meta-information definitely doesn't represent any textual content that we want to keep and analyse, so let's practise identifying and removing this.
In order to address this question, historical corpus linguists need to intensify collaborations with researchers in sociolinguistics and psycholinguistics, who have long been concerned with the social and cognitive processes that shape grammar and that ultimately also shape grammatical change.
A collocation graph is a visual representation of the collocational relationship between a node and its collocates.
In addition, the creation of the spoken BNC2014 and the London-Lund Corpus demonstrate the feasibility of creating corpora with significant amounts of spoken language.
Starting our investigation with particles occurring one position to the right of the node verb form, we can choose the position '1 Right' and set the restriction to 'any preposition'.
Frequency of very infrequent words in BNC, COCA, and three text archives / Web 1.5.
We can already see, therefore, from this relatively short sample of text that a failure to deal with this feature could cause issues in a number of places throughout the text.
For this, the creators of a corpus must hand a document to their future participants clearly explaining who the data will be accessible to and how it will be used.
Corpus linguistics plays a role among academic disciplines.
There are different ways to calculate lexical dispersion in a corpus.
By regular addition of synchronic data, a corpus attains a diachronic dimension.
You are interested to see content words around the node rather than frequent grammatical words.
This initial step crucially depends on the corpus and its goals, for example, which language or variety and which situational features thereof should be represented (cf.
In corpus linguistics a fundamental unit of reference is the wordform.
It is still an emerging field and will help shape the more general perspective on corpus linguistics as a field in the 21st century.
For instance, if a corpus is lexically tagged, each word in the corpus is assigned a part-of-speech designation, such as noun, verb, preposition, and so forth.
Moreover, if corpus pragmatics is concerned with the interpretation of meaning in context, another disadvantage associated with the relationship between corpus linguistics and pragmatics is that many larger corpora are impoverished both textually and contextually (Ru ¨hlemann 2010).
The main reason is that I have found, in my many years of teaching corpus linguistics, that most available textbooks are either too general or too specific.
The first is that you can employ the right mouse button (two-finger tap on touchpads on the Mac) to activate the context menu inside the browser in order to be able to save the material, as otherwise clicking on the link will simply get the text displayed inside a browser window, rather than saved to your computer.
So the corpus is already fairly old.
On the other hand, the linguist can compensate for this to some degree by acquiring a thorough understanding of the corpus and its description.
Nowadays, however, so many written texts exist in digital formats that they can be easily adapted for inclusion in a corpus.
The number of words used per sentence can also be calculated, even on a corpus that has not been subjected to syntactic annotations.
Please note that the extensions for the files containing the word tokens (.tok) and frequency lists (.frq) are not extensions that are generally recognised by any programs, such as editors, but you'll be able to view them with any text editor if you use the usual file-opening mechanisms.
In order for the sample to be representative, it should also include people with other types of occupations, different age ranges and from different regions.
The major goal is to provide an accurate rendition of the spoken text in written form, including certain paralinguistic aspects.
One of the problems is the need to find a good balance between tags which are specific enough so as to avoid unwanted amalgams, and categories which are sufficiently generic so that they can be reliably identified by annotators (see section 7.5).
However, some problems persist, and it is safe to assume that the number of pitfalls that a corpus linguist needs to try to avoid has not necessarily decreased, quite the contrary.
The researcher needs to be flexible in terms of restructuring the corpus creation process.
This becomes useful at subsequent stages of corpus management and reference.
With incomplete description of the corpus, people will be left wondering whether the material was in fact valid for the study.
Because of this, corpus compilers will often use special characters in a special way so that metadata is regarded as such.
Our options are type, lemma or lexeme.
Once we have cleaned up our concordances (available in the Supplementary Online Material, file LMY7), we will find that -icle has a token frequency of 20 772 -more than ten times that of mini-, which occurs only 1702 times.
This chapter will focus on a few kinds of statistical analyses that are often used in corpus linguistics and will try to get you in a position to turn a research question into something specific and testable.
Creating a machine-readable corpus can be a very costly and timeconsuming exercise.
But while corpora are certainly essential linguistic resources, it is important to realize that no corpus, regardless of its size, will contain every relevant example of a particular linguistic construction or be able to provide a fully complete picture of how the construction is used.
Finally, annotation and analysis should be separated from normative, oftentimes (over)prescriptive interpretation.
In some files, there may also be some additional information that appears after the main body of the text (which we could correspondingly refer to as a 'footer'), so that it's best to check the beginning and the end of a text for information that's not part of the main text of the book.
In a tagged corpus, various kinds of lexical categories, such as proper nouns or modal auxiliaries, can be easily retrieved.
Gut the interoperability between tools is still one of the major challenges for spoken corpus use and re-use across linguistic subdisciplines as discussed in Sect.
This may not seem like a great nuisance to you but, before you go on reading, look at the last word and think about in what way this may be problematic for further corpus-linguistic application.
The fourth component was the main reason to write this function: It returns for each match the corpus element in which it was found but also separates the match from its preceding and subsequent contexts with a tabstop (so that, if you print the content of exact.
If we jump to the frequency band, we see that the word "the" occurs 22 times in this text sample.
Occasionally, people refer to such collections as error corpora, but we will not use the term corpus for these.
A crucial characteristic of a diachronic corpus is that the texts it contains are comparable across periods.
One of the simplest ways to record metadata is as a simple table, which can be stored in a comma or tab-delimited value format (CSV or TSV).
The most frequent word produced by Max at the start of the corpus at 1 year and 9 months old was also no, with 24 occurrences.
While this is a fairly trivial reflection of groups of languages with little specific relevance for corpus linguistics, a grouping that is more important for our purposes is that between wellstudied and lesser-studied languages.
In the book, it is noted that these two approaches are not necessarily mutually exclusive: the generative linguist, for instance, could very well work with examples that are corpus-based rather than examples that are made up.
Layout design for other (printed) media is also supposed to be enhanced through XML Formatting Objects (XSL-FO).
Therefore, it may be advisable for the researcher to make a back-up copy of the corpus before taking the step of tagging it.
Referents that are important in a culture are more likely to be talked and written about than those that are not; thus, in a sufficiently large and representative corpus, the frequency of a linguistic item may be taken to represent the importance of its referent in the culture.
We will also need to make sure that the corpus collected in this way includes approximately the same speaking time or the same number of words pronounced by men and women.
Note especially how distance 1 is calculated: it is the distance between the last and the first occurrence of w 1 in the corpus.
Sometimes Sample the sample is carefully collected based on pre-defined criteria.
Text-oriented bundles, though, were important in all four disciplines.
Type by way of into the top and the command [nn*].
The last of these, standing for Twitter Archiving Google Sheet, automatically downloads tweets matching particular search parameters into a spreadsheet which can subsequently be used to build a corpus.
You generate a concordance if you want to know in which (larger and more precise) contexts a particular word is used.
For instance, if the corpus is to be used primarily for grammatical analysis (e.g.
For example, the measure of Referential Distance discussed in Chapter 3, Section 3.2 yields cardinal data ranging from 0 to whatever maximum distance we decide on and it would be possible, and reasonable, to calculate the mean referential distance of a particular type of referring expression.
Monospaced font indicates instructions/text to be typed into the computer, such as a search string or regular expression.
Collocates are words that co-occur with the node in a specifically defined span around the node, which we call the collocation window.
Additionally, it is important to take into account the country in which the corpus materials are used.
We won't go into issues of designing DTDs or schemas here because they're fairly complex, but will at least have a look at some of the rendering options for XML documents using style sheets.
Thus, corpus linguistics needs to explore more adequate and conservative ways to extend AMs to n-grams.
In this case, we could use the MyConc class as a foundation for a more complete corpus toolkit that could be released as an open source project allowing it to be used and extended by others.
Also included is a short context containing a span of text that precedes and comes after the search terms.
As far as the basic concordancing interface is concerned, you'll hopefully already have spotted that you can in fact adjust the context displayed by the concordancer for showing the result, as well as that there are various options for sorting our results, which is something we'll explore in more detail in Section 5.2.1.
These areas are a challenge to be met by the next generation of corpus linguists focusing on spoken corpora.
Different analyses can thus lead to different lemma assignments; accordingly, many lemmatization tools are careful to document the language-specific lemmatization guidelines that they follow.
However, unless you need to prune the reference list extensively, it can certainly allow you to identify some key terms much more quickly, and may therefore be seen as an alternative way of looking at single-word lists for identifying genredependent or semantic features of a corpus.
It is also the case that voice recognition software will continue to improve so that in the future it could very well be possible to automate the process of converting speech to text, and thus expedite the inclusion of, for instance, spontaneous dialogues in corpora.
The level of experience also has an influence on the type of message produced.
The texts which are collected in a corpus have a reflected reality: they are only real because of the presupposed reality of the discourses of which they are a trace.
For these phenomena, it is necessary to use data annotation and this annotation must be done manually on the basis of an observation of the entire corpus.
Comments, for example specifying what the code does for future reference, As mentioned above, the code can also be run directly in the console (the way to do this is to type the code after the prompt (the last angled bracket) and press [enter]); however, it is easier to save and edit code that is written in Panel 1.
To put it very simply, the null hypothesis states that there is nothing special going on in the corpus or corpora we analyse, e.g.
It is important to point out from the outset that the term parallel corpus is to some extent ambiguous, because it is sometimes used to refer to comparable original texts in two or more languages, especially texts that 258 M.-A.
Then we use if and any (see the very simple definition at ?any ¶) to let R check whether the file has XML or SGML annotation; depending on that, search.expression.alph and search.expression.ord will be defined in the required way.
Through small-scale case studies utilizing prominent English language corpora like the British National Corpus and the Corpus of Contemporary American English, the chapter underscores the necessity for careful post-processing of search results.
As we will see in this section, the best solution may be to take the texts from a text archive or the Web (containing billions of words of data), and then combine this with a robust corpus architecture.
Most corpora use Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), or Extensible Markup Language (XML) to have a unified structural markup system.
For some of these there is self-evident redundancy: between personality type and motivation, say, or between scholastic record and family background, where support for learning at home is reflected in performance in school.
What does it mean to say that a corpus is representative?
For some research questions, these lists can be very useful, whereas in other cases, it is necessary to resort to a real corpus containing linguistic productions in their context of use.
Several processes of elimination were developed to further screen the samples, resulting in a corpus based on 94,391 websites that yielded 22,388,141 webpages.
Starting with micro f1 and its accompanying standard deviation, we find relatively high scores for all of the classification tasks for each lemma individually as well as for the grouped set.
Yet, the conversion of linear corpus annotations into multi-layered ones still constitutes an unsolved challenge.
Although the number of collocates between the BNC and COCA (4-5 times as large as the BNC) is striking, in a corpus like enTenTen12 from Sketch Engine (which is 25 times as large as COCA), for some words (e.g.
Now, however, this is considered one of the standard five methods of the field, alongside frequency, concordance, n-gram and collocation.
If attempts are made to secure permission to use copyrighted material in a corpus, it is best to over collect the number of texts to include in each part of the corpus: A written text may be gathered for possible inclusion in a corpus, and its author (or publisher) may not give permission for its use, or (as was a common experience gathering written texts for inclusion in the American component of ICE) contact is made requesting permission but no reply is ever received.
Because many of the built-in editors, such as Windows Notepad or TextEdit on the Mac, are either not powerful enough (the former), or first need to be configured in special ways to handle plain text by default (the latter), I will make some recommendations for editors I consider suitable for corpus processing for Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux below, and also try to explain some of their advantages for basic corpus processing.
How do we handle the analysis of this concordance?
This kind of display is called keyword in context or KWIC.
For instance, the ratio for the above example, which we obtain by dividing the relative frequency of text 1 by that of text 2, would be 1.6, which clearly indicates that modals are more than 1½ times as frequent in text 1.
A small corpus, unless designed to contain particular data, will be unhelpful in investigating the behaviour of particular infrequent words or collocations.
When this level of technology is reached, corpus-based dialect studies will become the norm.
In our view, none of the parameters of authenticity, routineness, and spontaneity constitutes a demarcation criterion for corpus text and/or corpus linguistics.
It is evidently impossible to collect a sample of the whole language, but in the same way that a general language dictionary aims to describe the common lexicon of a language, the general corpus seeks to offer a global image, including the main textual genres found in language.
The text on the online page is editable, so you can also delete the u and see whether the quantification using the question mark still works, or even try some of your own words, if you know any other differences in spelling that relate to one character only.
Brown Corpus and British National Corpus can be accepted as balanced corpora.
To take a simple example: if we want to know what kinds of things are transferred between people in a given culture, we may look at the theme arguments of ditransitive constructions in a large corpus; we may look for collocates in the verb and theme positions of the ditransitive if we want to know how particular things are transferred (cf.
As we have described in previous chapters, one of the main focuses of corpus linguistic research is variation.
Items identified from either of these starting points then provide the basis for investigation through collocation and comparisons to see how particular academics and disciplinary communities used these features to express social identities.
On closer inspection, however, it becomes apparent that we may be dealing with a different type of exception here: the word pavement has additional senses to the one cited in (5a) above, one of which does exist in American English.
In order to ensure that the text numbers relate to the characteristics of each text, each text will also have the relevant header information described above.
For instance, a person working on developing a tool for machine translation (MT) requires a parallel corpus than a general one.
The syntax is therefore: [lemma = "film"] [tag = "ADJ"].
However, the corpus can only be used for questions based on comparisons within the Lost Generation in a broad sense, and it does not allow the user to perform comparisons along other lines of inquiry, for instance, carrying out comparisons between different genres of fiction.
Sometimes you may also have to correct artificial line breaks, for example, when you've extracted text from graphical formats -such as .ps or .pdf -, or those inserted by some browsers, as we've seen in Section 4.2.2.
So why should we actually be tempted to 'mess around' with our nice and clean data and possibly go through a lot of trouble in adding markup?
The keyword that we are searching for here and now is "say".
For instance, many corpus-based analyses of media discourse are based on examining media texts that address some particular topic.
Because of these advantages, corpus-based dialect studies have greatly expanded our knowledge of dialect variation, showing that social and regional linguistic variation are far more complex and pervasive than has previously been assumed.
Molin (2007), for instance, found that in the Hansard Corpus of Canadian parliamentary proceedings, transcriptions of the proceedings did not always capture the precise language that was used by conversants.
Returning to corpus linguistics, it is instructive to compare its methodological challenges and trajectories to those of psycholinguistics.
This research was a major driver to develop the multilingual corpus Multi-CAST (cf.
If one has a behavioural profile for a token, can one successfully predict which sense is being used?
Part IV of the handbook surveys these major areas of application, including classroom applications, the development of corpus-based pedagogical materials, vocabulary studies, and corpus applications in lexicography and translation.
Research papers and books have been published to introduce corpus linguistics and define how to use it or build a small corpus for pedagogic purposes.
The Contemporary Historical Corpus of American English (COHA) is an example of a diachronic corpus.
Indeed, corpus-based studies aim to test empirical hypotheses that are often formulated from the results of other studies, either more theoretical or empirical in nature, which have already been published in the scientific literature.
There is no single answer to these questions, as the right level of granularity of a (more or less precise or generic) annotation depends, to a large extent, on the objectives of the annotation and its feasibility.
Please note that, so far, what we've done has not turned the file into valid XML yet as there are still some parts missing, so we're really just 'pretending' that the file is XML.
Verwimp and Lahousse's study could be carried out on a transcribed spoken corpus in the absence of any form of syntactic notation, since the structure the authors were looking for matched a clearly identified lexical pattern.
While this approach is very versatile, it is also labor intensive: for each new type of information, a new script must be written which traverses the corpus in search of some information.
In some other sections of LGSWE the information about lexis is more extensive.
We consequently decided to investigate the frequency of sentence-initial as well in COHA, a corpus that provided us with enough material to examine its diachronic development in recent American English.
The Dire autrement corpus, created in Canada by Marie-Josée Hamel and Jasmina Milicevic, contains texts mainly produced by English-speaking learners.
Differently from the newspaper corpus, this turns out to be significantly higher, with higher variance, in translated fiction.
Finally, semantic prosody or discourse prosody refers to a broad function or meaning which tends to co-occur with the node but which may be variously realised.
It describes how linguistic corpora have played an important role in providing corpus linguists with linguistic evidence to support the claims they make in the particular analyses of language that they conduct.
What would the corpus need to look like?
Thus the PG books are more comprehensive in terms of lexis but LGSWE covers more topics in terms of grammar.
For example, it could turn out that an annotation set used for a corpus is based on false assumptions.
Both CONE and GraphColl permit partial exploration of graphs, accentuating this issue: a user chooses which nodes to expand (and thus compute collocates for), and this means it is possible to deliberately or unintentionally miss significant links to second-order collocates (or symmetric links back from a collocate to a node word).
Thus, while this is not an easy book, I hope these aids help you to become a good corpus linguist.
Otherwise, the corpus itself, without the metadata, will be useless since the researcher will not be able to know the background information of the corpus.
Compared to raw text, annotated text is complex in structure and difficult to access, but easier in analysis, better in interpretation, and more user-friendly in an application.
If these figures come from corpora of different sizes, for example a written corpus of 3,179,546 words and a spoken corpus of 573,484 words, they cannot be compared directly.
This article offers a critical view on using frequency data in corpus linguistics in the context of language learning; this critique is, however, applicable to other contexts as well.
For some languages, the written words are similar enough to their phonemic representations that text corpora can be used to examine questions relating to phonology.
It throws open the notion of 'aboutness' and uses a data-driven way of organising the content of a large corpus.
Hand-tagging an entire corpus, even a small one, is a monumental effort.
To continue developing the analogy with polls, if the goal is to know who students will vote for in the presidential elections, it will be enough to interview a sample of students, since such a sample is representative of that population.
As a lot of work has been done on named entity recognition in the field of computational linguistics, a key to address the problems raised in commonly used, large corpora in corpus linguistics would be to increase the collaboration between the areas, and to integrate the systems and practices developed in NLP and computational linguistics into corpora such as the BNC.
For instance, for Sample A, do we want to conceptually treat the reported speech as being of the same status as the descriptive parts, and do we thus want to analyse them together or separately?
In order to be able to easily group the files into sub-corpora, it is necessary to represent the features of each sample in an easily accessible manner.
Research of this typereferred to as a "corpus-driven" approach -identifies strong tendencies for words and grammatical constructions to pattern together in particular ways, while other theoretically possible combinations rarely occur.
However, given the advent of technology and corpus linguistics, it is now possible to study and analyse these patterns of usage.
There are many benefits of a corpus in all areas and subareas of linguistics and language technology.
Most corpus linguists will not read through an entire corpus.
In statistical terminology, this word simply means that the results obtained in a study based on one particular sample are unlikely to be due to chance and can therefore be generalized, with some degree of certainty, to the entire population.
The corpus was also divided into two sub-corpora: one consisting of collaboratively written essays (N = 51) and another consisting of individual essays (N = 102).
We'll soon investigate ways of extracting the text parts from these documents.
You can also determine the relative length and complexity of phrases (understood as dependency structures) by considering the number of head indices in the head column cross-referencing the head word of the phrase in question, or all phrases dependent on the verb node.
In other editors, such as Notepad++, there are additional options available via a dedicated 'Encoding' menu item, where you can specify what to encode a file in or even to convert between a limited set of encodings.
This is also why the solutions to, and discussions of, the exercises may often represent those parts of the book that cover some of the more theoretical aspects of corpus linguistics, aspects that you'll hopefully be able to master once you've acquired the more practical tools of the trade.
The header section contains metadata, a description of the file, the encoding, the text profile, mainly the language, the context or participants, and even a history of its revisions.
We have discussed diachronic comparisons, but the parameters and entities to be compared can be various.
Le Normand corpus includes seven children diagnosed with epilepsy and specific language impairment (SLI), recorded between the ages of 4 and 5 years.
However, this is of very little help in retrieving transitive verbs even from a POS-tagged corpus, since many noun-phrases following a verb will not be direct objects (Sam slept the whole day) and direct objects do not necessarily follow their verb (Sam, I have not seen); in addition, noun phrases themselves are not trivial to retrieve.
As we move through the text word by word, initially all words are new types and hapaxes, so the type-and hapax-counts rise at the same rate as the token counts.
First, we removed the content posted before 2016 in order to limit the likelihood of picking up diachronic effects; the tweets in the original corpus date back to 2006.
This leads to the second step, namely, to choose some λ, sample from the (normal) distribution of weights for the smooth implied by λ, and keep tuning λ until an optimal fit is obtained.
Identification of collocates of a word of interest (node) across the time-series data.
While voice recognition software has made tremendous progress recently, it still works best on monologic speech: an individual speaking slowly into a microphone that is then transferred into written text in a document.
For example, if the sample chosen includes 500 students met at the exit of a university building, the sample obtained will most likely not correspond to the actual result of the election, since this sample is not representative.
Speaking meaningfully about corpus frequencies is not straightforward.
When it comes to investigating phenomena that are not lexical in nature, the word-based nature of corpora is clearly a disadvantage and it may seem as though there is no alternative to a careful manual search and/or a sophisticated annotation (manual, semi-manual or based on advanced natural-language technology).
The boilerplate removal process usually goes hand in hand with the stripping of HTML markup code from web documents as HTML can offer clues about what is boilerplate and what is the main textual content.
For example, if we observe that a node word almost always occurs after an adjective -even if no single adjective co-occurs frequently enough with the node to be considered a collocate -we could say that the category of adjective is a colligate of that node.
Often, one uses the letters L and R (for 'left' and 'right') together with a number indicating the position of one collocate with respect to the main/node word to talk about collocations.
Type the expression into the box next to the label 'Term 1' and press the enter key or click on .
As the results of corpus-based research on grammatical change accumulate and as the methods of analysis become more sophisticated, the corpus ceases to be merely a tool and becomes an active ingredient in the further development of usage-based theoretical models.
As discussed above, in the case of words and in at least some cases of grammatical structures, the quality of automatic searches may be increased by using a corpus annotated automatically with part-of-speech tags, phrase tags or even grammatical structures.
Another approach, which usually looks at a larger span of potentially discontinuous words, is that of calculating the degree of relatedness of words that occur near a particular node word.
Let us look at one more example of the type/token distinction before we move on.
There, we concentrate on our strength: variationist corpus linguistics.
Finally, they resume problems in connection with the application of corpus linguistics in the classroom since knowledge of the restrictions of corpus linguistics is necessary for its coming prosperity.
Although this iterative process is often not reported in final publications, it is evident from the many textbook descriptions of corpus linguistics.
Is corpus use efficient for L2 learners -i.e.
Robustness is typically operationalized in terms of text coverage -the extent to which words on the list account for the total running words in a corpus.
In addition, there are 36 types that occur only in the prose sample (for example, churchmanship, dreamership, librarianship and swordsmanship) and 12 that occur only in the newspaper sample (for example, associateship, draughtsmanship, trusteeship and sportsmanship).
Crucially, it would cover a procedure in which the linguistic corpus essentially serves as a giant citation file, that the researcher scours, more or less systematically, for examples of a given linguistic phenomenon.
Ask a second person to make this annotation and calculate the percentage of agreement and the kappa coefficient.
As such, the following review sets a tractable limit on the literature it surveys, and that limit is the literature specific to corpus linguistics.
Also, researchers can use ASCII files in parsers, concordance programs, and taggers.
For now, the table below shows our token numbers for a 2-way DV.
The assumption of the Poisson process is that we know the average time between events, but not their exact timing (i.e., we have an expectation of how many verbs should occur in a text, but not whether they are evenly distributed or more at the end, or beginning, or occur close together in chunks, etc.).
Imagine also that there were no associations between words in the poem and words appeared randomly in the text.
The query will capture interrogatives, imperatives, subordinate clauses and other contexts that cannot contain tag questions, so let us draw a sample of 100 hits from both samples and determine how many of the hits are in fact declarative sentences with positive polarity that could (or do) contain a tag question.
Second, as with key items, a rigorous collocation analysis will always go beyond the raw list of statistical collocates to look at actual instances of those collocates in usage alongside the node.
Such situations are very common in corpus linguistics.
This difference does not necessarily reflect the analytic view of corpus compilers, but can often be due to technical conditions.
Once we have identified all text varieties that should be included, we need to decide how to collect relevant specimens and which ones of these to select for inclusion.
Finally, when automatic processing tools have been used for preparing and (helping to) annotating the data in the corpus, they must be clearly indicated.
A second round of proofreading is done after completion of the entire corpus so that the corpus can be viewed as a whole.
The latter relates to production and has been investigated with corpus-linguistic methods.
Instead, linguistic theories can be used to explain why particular frequencies and examples actually exist in a corpus: in other words, to discuss how theory and data interact.
However, the method of collecting citations cannot be regarded as a scientific method except for the purpose of proving the existence of a phenomenon, and hence does not constitute corpus linguistics proper.
Many such disciplines are focused on one form or another of close analysis of text, for instance history and literary criticism.
For those stuck between linguistics and literature, it becomes a decision regarding the intended audience of the corpus.
While this workaround has been used for a long time to good effect, it is also not optimal, since in many cases it excludes a large majority of the text from the calculation.
Below is an example concordance from COCA of adjective + woman, showing the first five lines.
One of our aims in that project was to find bottom-up and novel ways to explore a corpus whose contents were diverse but not in known ways.
The paper presents its findings as a number of case studies, moving from a study based on a single lemma, cause, to ones based on grammatical categories such as the imperative and the past tense.
The TTR values are as follows: 0.36 (text 1), 0.33 (text 2) and 0.39 (text 3).
That is to say, rather than telling you about the discipline of corpus linguistics -its history, its place in linguistics, its contributions to different fields, etc.
I shall survey the applications of corpus-linguistic methods in historical pragmatics by a selection of articles that illuminate recent trends within the field, demonstrate the range, and indicate future avenues for research.
For instance, would you want the corpus to contain a specific section of a newspaper (e.g.
But it is not difficult to imagine that for novice users of corpora, the numerous functions readily available in concordancers and online corpus interfaces have created another fallacy that might be called a "fallacy of sophisticated technology": with such state-of-the-art systems, what could go wrong?
What the random sampling entailed was simply generating a concordance of the potential phrasal expression in question using the entire BNC corpus.
You are using a corpus to look for patterns.
These annotations thus abstract away from the language-specific structures that morphological glossing and most PoS-tagging capture.
In other words, this meta-analysis investigates whether corpus use can have an effect over a wide range of variables, including vocabulary and grammar learning, error correction, lexical retrieval, and translation success.
It, therefore, taken by corpus linguistics, position and that of the anti-positivists.
Corpus development has already taken the normalized versions on board.
However, where corpus pragmatics' "added value" lies is in its insistence that these patterns be considered in light of the context -the situational, interpersonal, and cultural knowledge that interactional participants share.
If possible, try to create a corpus that can be published freely under an open license.
This "piece of extra information concerning the data" included in the corpus is what we call metadata.
Likewise, the topics men and women talk about (identified from the keywords of the corpus) also differ.
We then addressed some concrete problems, related to data coding and transcription into a corpus, and concluded that these questions needed to be resolved before starting the data collection phase.
In Section 2, an initial survey demonstrates the importance of the register factor in historical corpus linguistics and introduces a number of central matters that arise when the concept of register is applied to diachronic material.
However, even this would probably not be possible, since most text archives severely limit the number of "snippets" for a given search (e.g.
Text genres are defined not by their situational features but by specific linguistic features that are conventionally used and not clearly motivated by communicative functions.
In order to be able to spot developments even when the corpus is not (yet) fully transcribed, it is useful to transcribe data according to a systematic "zoom-in" pattern, where one starts with the first and the last recording of a child, then transcribes the recording in the middle between the two, then the two recordings in the middle of the stretches thus defined, and so on.
For instance, in the case of speech versus writing, we might propose a corpus that is 50 per cent spoken and 50 per cent written data (this is, in fact, the design of the International Corpus of English, ICE).
It is widely recognized that quantitative research failing to reach statistical significance (e.g., p > .05) is less likely to be accepted for publication.
There are five word tokens that contain this suffix (directly, briefly, wisely, truly, and wisely), so its token frequency is five; however, there are only four types, since wisely occurs twice, so its type frequency in this passage is four.
For example, we defined American English as "the language occurring in the BROWN and FROWN corpora", but we saw that the FROWN corpus contains at least one misclassified text by a British author, and we also saw that it is questionable to assume that all and only speakers of American English produce the language we would want to call "American English" (recall the uses of sidewalk by British speakers).
Something similar, albeit not to signal a parenthetical but instead some kind of pseudo-punctuation, happens again for "Yes-or" a little further down in the text.
One commonly used tagset is CLAWS (Constituent Likelihood Automatic Word-tagging System), available in different versions (e.g., CLAWS 5 contains just over 60 tags, while CLAWS 7 contains over 160).
This means that the researcher should have a clear mind about what to do with the corpus being collected.
The second part of the riddle was clear and matched the type of language in the sample.
Any rara (rare phenomena) are unlikely to be found in a small corpus, or if found, will be infrequent.
A project looking at the language of social media posts could be achieved by creating a corpus of Twitter posts and comparing the language used in the posts with written or spoken language found in existing corpora such as the CORE corpus found English-corpus.org.
Both from a theoretical and application point of view, corpus linguistics is a powerful method, which is empirical, scientific, realistic, authentic, open-ended, verifiable, and reliable.
Thus, there are multiple levels of corpus organization at which effects may be located, but these levels are typically not all tested.
The next section will describe this annotation as it applies to spoken language; a later section will focus on the annotation used in written texts.
But if you compute vocabularygrowth values on a corpus consisting of many files, then the order of the files is typically arbitrary and makes the vocabulary-growth curve you plot a bit dependent on the usually unmotivated order of files that the corpus comes in.
Because historical writings are the only source of direct empirical data about language from before the twentieth century, historical sociolinguistics has naturally adopted a corpus-based approach to data collection, showing that complex patterns of historical dialect variation can be observed in written sources.
We also suggest that these challenges are ultimately not so different from the pitfalls discussed by Rissanen in his "philologist's dilemma": just like in the early days of historical corpus linguistics, today's challenges pertain to the linguist's knowledge and understanding of their data.
There is very little agreement in the collocates recorded in the three collocation dictionaries: only 3 percent of the total number of collocates listed are found in all three dictionaries, and 82 percent appear in only one of the three dictionaries.
Next, the predictions must be tested -in the case of corpus linguistics, corpora must be selected and data must be retrieved and annotated, something we will discuss in detail in the next chapter.
They are labelled the External Corpus (EC) and the Internal Corpus (IC).
When tri-grams occur with a particular frequency (e.g., 20 times) and in one specific register in a corpus, they are often called lexical bundles.
The ICLE Corpus (The International Corpus of Learner English) contains samples of written English produced by advanced learners of English as a foreign language from 25 different language backgrounds.
The Corpus of Early English Correspondence consists of a collection of corpora containing various types of correspondence written in the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries.
For example, for investigating the expression of subjectivity in journalistic discourse, a corpus entirely made up of editorials would not be appropriate, since this is only a sub-section of the genre, which incidentally is more likely to contain markers of subjectivity than other sub-genres, as dispatches for instance.
This bias is a simple reflection of the fact that those creating the BNC and ICE Corpora felt that spontaneous dialogues are a very important type of spoken English and should therefore be amply represented.
In corpus linguistics the most useful ones are: mean, median and 20% trimmed mean.
Although the focus of this handbook is on corpus-based investigations of English language texts, a few of the studies reviewed here have addressed the issue of phraseology in other languages.
Corpus information on registers, frequency, and lexical preferences is key to a good understanding and use of grammar, and that is why they should no longer be ignored and should find their way into all types of grammar books.
For the right panel, we will define a number of corpus parts we want (here ten) so that the script can easily be changed to accommodate different divisions of the corpus into parts.
Comparing the texts shared by ECCO and ECCO-TCP, we find that more than 90% of the hapax legomena in the ECCO sample (henceforth ECCO-OCR) are not found in ECCO-TCP.
In these cases, quantitative corpus linguistics is essentially a variant of sociolinguistics, differing mainly in that the linguistic phenomena it pays most attention to are not necessarily those most central to sociolinguistic research in general.
We have selected one particular framework to guide the students in their interpretation of their corpus findings.
Lexical information is one area where the corpus-informed books have a clear advantage over the non-corpus-informed books.
It is also important to note that unlike English, in which different forms of a lemma may have different collocates and semantic prosodies (e.g.
While lexically tagging corpora with part-of-speech information can now be done quickly and quite accurately, parsing a corpus is a much more difficult undertaking, since the level of accuracy decreases when identifying structures such as noun phrases or imperative sentences.
Typically, these measures take into account frequencies in the whole corpus.
But there are caveats to the process of creating a corpus outlined in this section.
While the raw text of an unannotated corpus has its own unique value, (wisely) annotated corpora offer great advantages over the raw text when it comes to the investigation of linguistic phenomena.
When a rare word such as homeostasis occurs just once in a small corpus, it is highly unlikely that it would occur at the mathematically equivalent 90 times in a million words.
In fact, a large corpus is not always suitable for addressing all kinds of research questions.
In line with the definition above, we would now try to determine their distribution in a corpus.
We will now show that this approach continues to perform strongly when the data is taken from a corpus of specialized language and is annotated at finer levels of granularity (i.e.
This is, in short, why corpus linguistics matters.
For instance, the London/Oslo/Bergen (LOB) Corpus contains one million words of edited written British English as well as the same genres and length of samples (2,000 words) as the Brown Corpus with only very minor differences: In several cases, the number of samples within a given genre vary: popular lore contains 44 samples, while in the Brown corpus the same genre contains 48 samples (cf.
Alternatively, they're also used in certain types of linguistic annotation.
Although you need to register in order to use the corpus, as we mentioned in the previous chapter, access to the corpora is free of charge.
For instance, the Brown Corpus contains 2,000-word samples taken from complete texts (e.g.
Or take the example of Sex, one of the demographic speaker variables included in many modern corpora: By accepting the values of this variable, that the corpus provides (typically male and female), we are accepting a specific interpretation of what it means to be "male" or "female".
For example, the constituent S representing the clause has a similar meaning to the sentence annotation in the 'sentence types' layer, but these have been modeled as separate.
Hirschmüller observed the following: (1) complex prepositions cluster in nonfictional texts, a preference that is amplified in the Kolhapur Corpus; (2) learned and bureaucratic writing shows a more pronounced pattern in the Kolhapur Corpus than in the British and American corpora.
And even where transcribed spoken texts have been included in a corpus it can be difficult to assess the degree of standardisation (cf.
These are generally captured in corpus linguistics as part of the external contextual features.
This may seem like a fairly obvious point, but in conducting comparisons of the many different corpora that now exist, the analyst is likely to encounter corpora of varying length: corpora such as Brown or LOB are one million words in length and contain 2,000-word samples; the London-Lund Corpus is approximately 500,000 words in length and contains 5,000-word samples; and the British National Corpus is 100 million words long and contains samples of varying length.
Given that the information was public at the time of crawling, one could make a case that including it in the corpus is unproblematic, but it is quite easy to imagine scenarios in which the publication of data crawled from the web can lead to legally or ethically challenging situations.
For example, for a question-answering system, some of the typical features (or functions) involve the recognition of a linguistic expression as a question, analysis of the type of the question, understanding the syntactic structure of a question, capturing meaning embedded into it, recognizing the sentiment hidden in the question, searching out an appropriate document that may carry an answer, extraction of the answer from a document, evaluation of the answer before responding, and finally generating the answer either in text or speech mode.
We also showed how to measure the lexical richness of a corpus using the type/token ratio, and presented the limitations of such a measurement.
To make the sampling manageable, corpus designers often start with a set of categories within which they aim to collect an unbiased sample.
But there is another dimension to extensibility: The reliability of a particular annotation can also "vanish" because it turns out to be misguided, for whatever reason.
As a consequence, many corpus linguists have chosen not to do any statistical analysis, and work instead with frequency counts.
Weekly and pre-post tests recorded word knowledge on both definitional and novel-text gap-fill measures.
The OBC2.0 or the Hansard Corpus, both already discussed above, are good examples.
The idea that collocation is of high or indeed primary importance to understanding the meaning of a word or other linguistic form originates with J.R. Firth and is very important in the neo-Firthian school of corpus linguistics; but collocation analysis itself is a commonplace of most or all approaches to corpus linguistics.
The question of influence and significance also comes back to the question of availability, since it is of course more difficult to collect a large and representative corpus of post cards or shopping lists than of newspaper articles.
However, even this relatively simple operation can raise issues regarding what is, and what is not, considered to be part of the same lemma.
However, it only takes eight token before we reach the first repetition (the word a), so while the token frequency rises to 8, the type count remains 9 Morphology constant at seven and the hapax count falls to six.
Open the copy in your editor and place the cursor at the end of line 66, which should give us enough text to evaluate the tagging.
As Cook (1995: 37) notes, a spoken text is made meaningful by more than the words one finds in a transcription: How a conversation is interpreted depends crucially upon such contextual features as paralanguage (e.g.
Conrad argued that three changes prompted by corpus-based studies of grammar had "the potential to revolutionize the teaching of grammar" (2000: 549): first, monolithic descriptions of English grammar would be replaced by register-specific descriptions; second, the teaching of grammar would become more integrated with the teaching of vocabulary; and third, the emphasis would shift from structural accuracy to the appropriate conditions of use for alternative grammatical constructions.
These annotation steps are often referred to as "tagging" or "coding" in the literature.
A practical solution is to code these characteristics directly onto the file names: this is why these names are another important element that should be taken into account when creating the corpus.
To study variation by gender in, say, spontaneous dialogues, on the other hand, it becomes necessary to extract from a series of conversations in a corpus what is spoken by males as opposed to femalesa much more complicated undertaking, since a given conversation may consist of speaker turns by males and females distributed randomly throughout a conversation, and separating out who is speaking when is neither a simple nor straightforward computational task.
Type 8 (o = 41, e = 18.9), exemplified by formations such as disembodiment, subsumes all the features of the overall prototype (types 5, 7), except for the fact that it consists of prefixed forms that merely cannibalize on the high frequency of types 5 and 7.
For example, if the purpose is to study the use of specific collo-cations, lemmas, or n-grams, the researcher can use concordance programs such as Wordsmith or AntConc.
Corpus tagging involves the same pros and cons as with other speech data and non-standard data.
A news writing corpus would need to include the various types of news textssports and lifestyle news as well as state, local, national, and international news.
Six words later, there is another occurrence of a, so type and hapax counts remain, respectively, at 12 and 11 as the token count rises to 14, and so on.
If we limit ourselves just to metaphorical expressions of this type, i.e.
If you're unsure what a particular 'word' entry in the list means, click on it and this will take you to a concordance of that entry.
Second, the annotation practices need to be documented.
The first step is to identify which occurrences will be annotated in the corpus.
Make sure that you have the collocation measure in the 'Collocates Preferences' set to 'MI' initially and that the 'Sort by Stat' option is selected.
Moreover, when initially created, the Brown Corpus, for instance, had to be loaded on to a mainframe computer for analysis, whereas many corpora such as COCA are now available for analysis over the Web or on a home computer.
Unfortunately, speech recognition software is not yet accurate enough to automatically create text from sound recordings unless they are of broadcast quality.
If sentences following such a syntactic structure never or almost never appear in the corpus, linguists might conclude that this sentence is only rarely used in English.
While a raw corpus is a highly useful resource, annotation provides an extra layer of information, which can be counted, sorted, and compared.
In order to study the distribution and prevalence of this type of structure in the French spoken in Parisian suburbs, all the occurrences of indirect questions were collected in a small oral corpus of approximately 350,000 words.
Corpus linguistic studies have frequently noted the general distinction between two different modes of language production -written language and spoken language.
Let us look at one example from the case study chapter below, the collocation of alphabetical order.
Two solutions are pursued in the literature: -The random forest implementations that seem to be most widely used in (corpus) linguistics offer the functionality of computing variable importance scores, which quantify the size of the effect that a predictor has on the response; some version of thesepermutation-based scores, conditional importance scores, and scaled or unscaled onesare reported frequently.
There are many other kinds of annotation which a researcher might apply for the specific purposes of their own research questions, such as different kinds of discourse-pragmatic or stylistic annotation.
The choice of corpus has to be guided, first and foremost, by the research question.
Secondly, Corpus Linguistics attempts to make contributions to linguistic theory that are informed by quantitative information.
Therefore, the list produced by BNCweb actually also contains one redundant column, depending on whichever list wasn't selected, and where all the type frequencies are set to 0.
The lemmas most frequently modified by implacable in the 450-million-word Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) are enemy and foe, followed at some distance by force, hostility, opposition, will, and the hatred found in (4a).
And once you've reached a more advanced level in your research, you might also want to consider using a 'proper' markup language, such as HTML or XML, for annotating and categorising your data.
This type of information is not a part of the text analysis but it can provide important interpretive information used in the functional analysis of your results.
One approach would seem to be to try and tweak hyperparameters of fitting trees, such as (1) the minimum decreases in deviance that define when trees stop splitting, (2) the minimum sample sizes per node, or (3) the tree depth.
How big a corpus should be?
But as we have seen in Section 4, size is not everything -most text archives have such a simplistic interface that they also are very limited in the range of queries that they offer.
This container element is also known as the root element, and every well-formed XML document needs to have one.
Understanding the choice between possible variants is one of the main foci of corpus linguistics, especially variationist corpus linguistics.
In OALD8 and CALD3, there is no collocation box for verbs of evidence: a limited number of collocations and phraseological units are highlighted in bold in example sentences.
Most genres traditionally studied in quantitative corpus linguistics tend to comprise of longer texts, compared to the extremely short text lengths of up to only a few dozen words which are overwhelmingly common on, for example, social media.
Moreover, some semantic aspects are part of the typologically oriented annotation systems, and we will outline these in 7.3.
A handful of examples of a particular token is not enough to give a confident sense of the full range of its behaviour, even if they can give a general sense of meaning.
On the other hand, this very redundancy may help us to classify -or even identify the exact genre ofa text better.
For the spoken parts of a corpus, several additional variables need to be considered: the dialects the individuals speak, the contexts in which they speak, and the relationships they have with those they are speaking with.
For example, as mentioned above, an important consideration in understanding the use of any feature (including both word lists and n-grams) relates to the distribution (or dispersion) of a feature in the corpus.
For example, lexical simplicity implies that the number of different words should be smaller than in an original text.
Similarly, a person working on comparative studies between two or more languages requires a multilingual comparable corpus than a monitor one.
In this case, the span (collocation window) is one word to the left and one word to the right, sometimes abbreviated to 1L, 1R.
The conventions used can be explained in the corpus documentation or may follow a more widely recognized standard.
As might be expected, much of the research on lexis and grammar stems from applied linguistic concerns.
For register studies, an observation is typically each text that you enter into your database.
In order to find only the occurrences of who and which as relative pronouns, we should use a corpus in which the syntactic structure of each sentence has been analyzed in such a way that we can assign a grammatical function to each word and group them into syntactic constituents.
To address these research questions, Elsness restricted his analysis to four different registers of the Brown Corpus: Press Reportage; Belles Lettres, Biography, etc.
Lists of high-frequency names are often used when designing automatic taggers, which might account for the fact that with names of lower frequencies, the tagging of white in names appears less systematic.
For this study, the use of a word list offers major advantages compared to a corpus: the grammatical category of words is already known, which simplifies noun retrieval: every word is already associated with its grammatical gender.
This type of display may already be highly useful for identifying most of the potential for grammatical and semantic polysemy, but the maximum number may not allow you to extract enough samples in cases where a search term has a high degree of polysemy on both levels.
For example, the copyright registrations for 1961 suggest that the category of periodicals is severely underrepresented relative to the category of books -there are roughly the same number of copyright registrations for the two language varieties, but there are one-and-a-half times as many excerpts from books as from periodicals in the BROWN corpus.
Words are often the linguistic element the most subjected to annotations in a corpus.
The empirical basis on which researchers can now rely, especially for writing, is more solid than in previous data collections which, in the eyes of SLA specialists themselves, suffered from a lack of representativeness.
Even a 100 million word corpus like the BNC is too small for some purposes, such as lexicographic and collocational research.
Together, this research explicitly contradicts the view that corpus linguistics takes an impoverished, decontextualized view of texts and replaces it with a detailed picture of how students and academics write in different genres and disciplines.
For example, in order to study the linguistic differences between French and English, one possibility would be to create a comparable corpus of leading articles from journalistic sources with a similar political orientation, published during the same years.
Dalton-Puffer (1996: 108) adduces evidence from the Helsinki Corpus to show that the origins of -ment as a productive nominalizing suffix lie in the years between 1250 and 1350.
There is a problem with id f : it says that terms which occur only once in a corpus are the most important for document classification.
Each MP sample was compared against every other MP using two similarity measures: Jaccard and Log Likelihood.
Type 10 (o = 19, e = 1.7), a second right-branching type, is structurally identical, but encodes a result rather than an action, in formations such as malnourishment.
Ideally, a language development corpus presents an ecologically valid and representative picture of the linguistic development of language learners.
Knowing this, we now only need to learn how to manipulate/refer to the text we want to pre-pend to the turn.
Most recently (i.e., since the late 2000s), corpus tools were more commonly used by various groups, including not only researchers, but also language teachers and students, who finally had direct access to corpus.
As discussed in Section 3.2.2.1 of Chapter 3, this brings with it its own problems, as automatic tagging and grammatical parsing are far from perfect.
In fact, for many analysts, a primary virtue of a key items list is that it provides a way in to identifying which words or categories in a corpus will be of interest for more detailed study.
For HTRs, we could follow a similar procedure: in this case we are dealing with a nominal variable Type with the variables occurs only once and occurs more than once, so we could construct the corresponding table and perform the 𝜒 2 test.
When annotating a corpus, we may also be interested in adding information about the relationships that exist between elements in our texts above the level of the individual word that may help shed light on larger patterns in our corpus.
In keeping with the theme of seeking meaningful patterns in ELF above the level of individual words, in Section 2 we report a large-scale study of verb syntax in the ELFA corpus.
Each letter is also annotated for its date of publication, facilitating the analysis of temporal variation in this corpus.
This was followed (in the 1960s) by the Brown Corpus (which contains 2,000 word samples of various types of edited written American English).
As a sub-type of this query option, there are also two highly useful menu options for querying in only spoken or written texts.
If we think of the two samples as subsamples of the same corpus, it is very counterintuitive to do so.
Although we all encounter a number of different file formats containing text on a daily basis while using the computer, many people generally tend not to be aware of the fact that the text contained in these files may not always be easy to process.
If the corpus contains part-of-speech tags, for example, this will allow us to search (within limits) for grammatical structures.
However, at the same time, this narrow corpus-methodological focus makes it possible to systematically complement the quantitative findings with a detailed qualitative analysis.
Keyness in corpus linguistics is but the first statistical step in the analysis of texts.
All you need to do to create a basic single-word list is load a corpus, select the 'Word List' tab, and click Start .
In providing all this information, the compilers clearly chose to collect as much metadata as possible.
From a qualitative perspective and using a close-reading method, as is often the case in literature research, the use of overlapping genre categorizations can provide a way of connecting the content and style of the text being read to different movements or periods from which the author might have drawn their inspiration or within which they might have been an active participant.
The probably simplest way to achieve the same objective is to use attach to make all columns of the data frame available without having to type the name of the data frame.
Annotated concordance data enable the researcher to perform statistical analyses over hundreds or thousands of data points, identifying distributional patterns that might otherwise escape the researcher's attention.
Unfortunately, when using the latter option, you have to type and add each word individually, so it's often best to prepare a list beforehand and then add to this manually if you find that it doesn't filter the list enough yet.
If a corpus is divided into word samples representing different types (or genres) of the language, it can be labeled as a 'balanced' or 'representative' corpus.
Again, this is simpler in the case of morphologically marked and relatively simple grammatical structures, for example, the s-possessive (as defined above) is typically characterized by the sequence ⟨ [pos="noun"] [word="'s"%c] [pos="adjective"]* [pos="noun"] ⟩ in corpora containing texts in standard orthography; it can thus be retrieved from a POS-tagged corpus with a fairly high degree of precision and recall.
It might just as easily occur once in the hypothetical million-word corpus, or five times, or maybe not at all: the actual smaller corpus simply does not give us enough evidence to extrapolate.
If your browser indicates an error, go back to the XML file and first verify whether you've set all start and end tags correctly, as this is generally the most common error.
Yet, the building of an LD-based corpus faces particular challenges through the typically severer limitations of resources and the fact that potential academic users of the corpus have typically no prior knowledge.
The first of these is that they act as a means to reflect the hierarchical structure and logic of the text.
To capture this I compiled a corpus from each of the published single-authored works of two experienced and wellknown applied linguists, Deborah Cameron and John Swales.
As we will see in Chapter 7, TEI tagging can also be used for making more detailed annotations than dividing the text into sentences.
The incorporation of a computational annotation system allows for systematic, rigorous annotation followed by statistical analysis.
However, chances are that this choice of words is highly problematic: While both words are equally long and equally frequent in one and the same corpus, they could hardly be more different with regard to the topic of this chapter, their dispersion, which probably makes them useless for the above-mentioned hypothetical purposes, controlled experimentation, vocabulary testing, or vocabulary lists.
This type of "literature review" is common in the introductory sections of research articles, and the effects of corpus use have been the object of several extensive narrative syntheses (e.g.
As will be noted below, those contributions may relate to the mechanisms by which language changes over time, or to the nature of the difference between registers, or to the relationship between lexis and grammar.
As we have discussed earlier in this chapter, in the KWIC section, you could then see your keyword in a textual context.
Anyone studying a corpus may like to know the frequency and patterns of use of each item in it.
Relative quantitative differences are expressed and dealt with in different ways depending on the type of data they involve.
Repeat this step for the frequency in the newspaper corpus, ensuring that the formula bar reads =D2/n_newspapers.
The goals of the CHECL are to complement, but not duplicate, the coverage of existing textbooks and handbooks on corpus linguistics.
First, in order to assess the productivity of a morphological rule, or even to assess word formation, that is, whether certain words made up from derivation or morphological composition exist, a corpus can offer much more information than the one found in a dictionary.
Between 2002 and 2006, although researchers still cited corpus-based grammar references for their studies (e.g., Cambridge Grammar of the English Language), one group of researchers made use of newly developed datasets, both large or small, such as The CHILDES Corpus, Wordnet, and A New Academic Word List.
This part already contains information on how to tag your data morpho-syntactically, using freely available tagging resources, and how to make use of tagging in your analyses.
In this book titled Corpus Linguistics, Context, and Culture by Wiegand & Mahlberg (2019) Corpus Linguistics, Context and Culture explain the possibility of corpus linguistic methods for discussing language manners across a domain of contexts.
It is actually not always easy to find texts available in a digitized format for all text genres, and even when such texts exist, they might not all be usable due to copyright issues.
In order to simplify the discussion that follows, we illustrate our points about the fundamentals of annotation using primarily English data.
Being able to annotate relations is also essential for associating anaphoric relations in a text.
For the English-French pair (remember that the TED corpus is unidirectional), these variations enabled the authors to compare the impact of this variable on the translations under scrutiny.
This tension is determined by the text(s) under analysis.
A corpus of general English, for instance, must sample both spoken and written data (of various kinds) in order to be representative; however, what should the relative proportions of speech versus writing be?
In sum, there are compelling arguments to include type frequencies from theoretical considerations as well as from neighboring disciplines such as psycholinguistics or computational linguistics, and there are promising first results within corpus linguistics proper, but more exploration is definitely required.
For yes and no answers, we can employ a similar type of traffic signal analogy and encode them like one-way street signs.
There are studies that look at the text frequency per million words of the PP (e.g.
Yet the by far most serious issue is the presence of errors in the source material, which introduces errors to analyses, and, in the worst case, may compromise the representativeness of corpora.
Indeed, the larger the corpus, the more the words end up repeating themselves and, therefore, the ratio decreases all the more.
As such features are often repeated verbatim across multiple pages on a single website, it is desirable to remove them to prevent the words they contain from becoming unnaturally frequent in the resulting corpus.
Conversely, if the ratio had been below 1, we could easily have observed that they were more frequent in text 2.
In a for-loop, we randomly reorder each play with sample, apply ttr to it, and collect the y-coordinates from its fifth component.
This is exactly what the methodology of corpus linguistics offers to researchers in disciplines beyond linguistics.
For this reason, we have made the decision to replace URLs with a fixed token, which makes it easier to identify certain tweets.
In short, the goal of the second edition of English Corpus Linguistics is to provide a comprehensive description of all aspects of corpus linguistics, ranging from how to build a corpus to how to analyze a finished corpus.
One example is the Hansard Corpus, compiled by Jean Anderson and Marc Alexander, which contains the proceedings of the British Houses of Parliament from 1803 to 2005 and represents nearly 40,000 individual speakers.
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, along with English for Specific Purposes and Cognitive Linguistics, is another example of a specialized journal actively being cited by corpus linguistics papers.
This is why corpus linguistics has grown as an area of linguistics and why many people now are using linguistic corpora for many different purposes.
Section 3 presents small-scale studies of corpus searches involving words that may be frequently used as named entities, or parts of named entities.
Recall that in our case studies in Chapter 6 we excluded all instances where this assumption does not hold (such as proper names and fixed expressions); since there is no (or very little) choice with these cases, including them, let alone counting repeated occurrences of them, would have added nothing (we did, of course, include repetitions of free combinations, of which there were four in our sample: his staff, his mouth, his work and his head occurred twice each).
This corpus was designed to document less commonly taught languages or regional varieties of widespread languages.
Monomodal text-only corpora in English are sometimes annotated automatically with the use of 'taggers' and 'parsers'.
If you're less interested in literary language, but may be more interested in exploring 'real' linguistic corpora, this type of data may already be more useful for you, especially if your main interest is in learner language.
On the other hand, in case of a monitor corpus, which tries to represent all possible text varieties, we may include all non-standard and ordinary text samples along with standard and established text samples.
Although not in a statistical sense as we described dispersion in Chapter 7, you can check the visual of the distribution in AntConc by using the "Concordance Plot" option (see Chapter 5 for details).
In the foregoing search for structure in the DECTE corpus the initial selection of phonetic variables was subjective, but the data representation and the transformation methods used to refine the selection were generic, as were the clustering methods used to analyze the result.
Most of the analyses we will want to undertake with our corpus will be centred on a much smaller linguistic unit, such as the sentence, the clause or, perhaps most commonly, the word.
In corpus linguistics, we worry about both type frequency and token frequency (cf.
This is an example of a study based on a corpus with integrated linear annotations.
As discussed in 3.1.6, a good first step in this process is to elicit names for text varieties or speech events from native speakers.
And one always ought to remember that, even though one might never know how a corpus may potentially be used by others, not all types of annotation need to be included in all corpora, simply because this may be possible or relatively easily achievable.
Much work has gone into developing efficient annotation strategies for differentiating items belonging to named entities from those representing regular uses of the words.
The single-genre approach has the advantage of improving diachronic comparability, but comes at the expense of coverage, both with respect to synchronic variability and time-depth.
The right to anonymity of the persons mentioned in the corpus represents another important ethical problem.
Based on a small selection of four literary files we'll download and analyse later, I tested the approximate ratio of words per kilobyte, which appears to be around 180, so that per 1,000 words we may want to collect for our own corpora, we'd probably require about 5.5 kB of text.
The chapter then presents a sample study of registers within a specific subject area -civil engineering -to exemplify several characteristics and challenges in more detail.
As we haven't discussed any of the issues in processing such text samples yet, it may not be immediately obvious to you that these different types of register may potentially require different analysis approaches, depending on what our exact aims in analysing them are.
The impossibility of this task is widely acknowledged in corpus linguistics.
Even though the processes of collecting and encoding data for inclusion in a corpus are described above as separate processes, in many senses they are closely connected: After a conversation is recorded, for instance, it may prove more efficient to transcribe it immediately, since whoever made the recording will be available either to transcribe the conversation or to answer questions about the recording to aid in its transcription.
The corpora include different varieties of English, including American (Corpus of Contemporary American English), British (British National Corpus), and Canadian (Strathy Corpus).
Here, the distinction between the two is essentially that the headword encompasses all the occurrences of a base form, regardless of PoS, while the lemma always represents a combination of base form + PoS tag (forms).
These methodological considerations are generally disregarded in corpus-driven studies of phraseology.
Two spans were used: four words either side of the node and nine words either side of the node; • whether counts were based on lemmatized or non-lemmatized counts.
Different XML tags are used for markup, metadata and annotation.
The word bungalow is the least frequent word, with 1,100 occurrences in the corpus, corresponding to frequency rank number 53,542 and frequency class number 16.
For example, the Air Traffic Control Speech Corpus and the Corpus of Early Modern English Tracts are specialized corpora.
As we have explained in Chapter 2, texts have different properties on two different dimensions, text-internal/linguistic and text-external/situational.
In order to study one of these areas specifically, it is preferable to resort to a specialized corpus.
This corpus was created for the study of grammatical variation in dialects rather than phonetic/phonological variation.
The early tagging systems of the Brown and LOB corpora made no provision for discourse markers.
So far, this type of data is only available for a small number of participants in two languages.
This paper explores these issues, looking, at an abstract level but illustrated through examples, at the interaction between corpus linguistics and the social sciences.
An important element to take into account when downloading a corpus from the Internet is its encoding format (this not to be confused with the compression format, when applicable, that needs to be handled by means of specific archiving tools).
Words and phrases: corpus studies of lexical semantics.
Often this is fast and unproblematic and I must admit that the vast majority of my work with XML files is really just that.
For some phenomena such as the annotation of morphosyntactic categories or speech acts, every word or sentence in the corpus will be involved.
However, a grouping factor such as LEMMA is usually a categorical variable with more than two levels.
As a result, we have one vector with only -ic tokens (both.adjectives), but another one that says which suffix each token was attested with originally (their.suffixes), which we can then tabulate for both raw frequencies and percentages.
Notable improvements could also be gained by the increased collaboration between traditional corpus linguists and scholars in the fields of computational linguistics and NLP, of which there are already encouraging examples.
In the first loop, we identify all cases of must + V so that, at the end of it, we know all verb types ever occurring after must, and then we can look for all occurrences of all of them in the whole corpus within the second loop.
On the other hand, maybe keeping the amount of spoken data in the BNC relatively low was actually not too bad an idea, since transcribing spoken language is an expensive and time-consuming business, and one where corpus compilers often take too many 'shortcuts'.
In the next few paragraphs I will focus in turn on spoken, written, and web-based language sampling and examine compilation issues specific to each type.
The web may not be a corpus in a conventional sense but, as we have seen, it can be a valuable corpus surrogate or, increasingly, a source of texts for the building of corpora.
To find the adjectives used to the left of this word, the element order of the query must be reversed [tag = "ADJ"] [lemma = "acteur"].
I will develop this proposal by successively considering and dismissing alternative characterizations of corpus linguistics.
The type frequency of the, of course, is 1.
A 15-word sample (91 clusters) was annotated by two annotators in order to test the reliability of the general procedure, obtaining a reasonably high interannotator agreement (Cohen's kappa coefficient of 0.55).
However, this is no time to rest on our laurels-now that corpus linguistics has become mainstream, and that's a good thing, we too must continue to refine our methods just as other fields have to.
The flipside is that this may potentially compromise the representativeness and balance of the filtered sample, and this needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis due to the uneven and erratic distribution of OCR errors in the database.
As we will see later in this chapter, this method shares the use of a quantitative methodology with corpus linguistics.
Since resampling methods are very powerful for estimating the distribution based on smaller datasets, they appear as a potentially useful avenue for the development of new methods for the analysis of texts across text lengths.
In the same way, the question of the representativeness of specialized corpora is clearly simplified, because this can be achieved by choosing texts or recordings belonging to a specific genre.
Therefore, much of the statistics we see for corpus linguistic data are multivariate rather than univariate as in Section 8.3.
In contrast, if you don't know what you want to look for ahead of time, but you are interested in the possibilities a corpus may have, you can either design a new computer program for yourself and run your own data, or run the n-gram program already available to you (e.g., through AntConc, a software that we discuss more in Chapter 5).
The selection of the texts to include in your corpus depends on their suitability and their availability.
Exercise 6 has hopefully already alerted you to the fact that it isn't easily possible to just use any document that we can read in some way on the computer equally well as a source for our corpus-linguistic analysis, simply because it contains text.
Especially rare linguistic phenomena might not occur in sufficient numbers in a corpus that contains data U.
This chapter provides you with an opportunity to use readily available corpora to conduct corpus linguistics projects.
Added to this is a layer of inadvertent 'noise' created along the way as a corpus text travels from historical manuscript or print to digital edition.
Another limitation to the use of online corpora available for consultation is that they only offer limited access to their metadata (see Chapter 6).
However, as also discussed in Chapter 2, software-aided queries are the default in modern corpus linguistics, and so we take these as a starting point of our discussion.
As against SLA studies which have traditionally prioritized morphology and grammar, LCR is characterized by a strong focus on lexis, lexico-grammar, and a range of discourse phenomena.
The general rule of course is that this should be a language that all potential corpus users understand.
The third thing which can be added to the raw text of a corpus is metadata.
He also argues that by not doing so, corpus linguists risk violating fundamental assumptions about the independence of the error terms in models.
WordSmith Tools was then used to upload all the texts (over 4,000) and construct what is called an "index" of all the words in the corpus.
Similarly, it is possible to create a sizeable corpus of Latin, with a time-depth of over 2000 years, as shown by the 13-million-word LatinISE corpus, built by Barbara McGillivray.
Then, we will address various important methodological concerns for creating a corpus, in particular questions related to the size and representativeness of samples, and will explain simple methods for data sampling and coding.
Fortunately, this basic problem has a simple mathematical solution, which commonly forms the basis of typical quantitative corpus-linguistic inquiries.
Each text that is part of the corpus will also have metadata such as the date and place it was recorded, who spoke or signed, who else was present, and what media files are associated with the text.
In the most general terms, our plea here is one for informed use of diachronic resources.
For instance, ready-made concordance tools often have slightly different settings that specify what 'a word' is, which means you can get different results if you have different programs perform the same search on the same corpus.
Learner levels vary depending on the corpus.
Well, for one thing, markup helps to structure information, for example, in separating documents into appropriate sections/divisions with headings, sub-headings, paragraphs, etc.
For example, raw data can be presented in brackets in a table next to the relative frequencies, as shown in In the text of an article, the two frequency elements can be reported as follows: "There were 94 occurrences of parce que in the corpus, corresponding to a relative frequency of 3.61 occurrences every 10,000 words".
Furthermore, most HTML page sources do contain a fair bit of information before the actual start of the text, which is signalled through the <body> tag, so most of what precedes it should be considered 'non-text'.
If you look at the text again, you'll notice that the next level below the dialogue in our text is the speaker turn, so it would be quite logical to use this label for a tag surrounding each turn.
Rather than using two different corpora entirely, some researchers use various subcorpora from the same (reference) corpus for the 'target' and 'reference' sets, and this approach is further exemplified in the two representative studies summarised below.
Textual markup is important too, though corpora will vary in terms of how much of such markup they contain.
Not only is it difficult to approximate the full range of synchronic variability for a language at a given point in time, there is a further difficulty in doing so without compromising diachronic comparability.
As a way forward in trying to find solutions to improve the adaptability of databases for linguistic research, Hiltunen calls for more interdisciplinary discussions and collaboration between corpus linguistics, Digital Humanities, and related disciplines, which are still too far from each other because of the disparities in their research agendas.
In much of the code below -in particular in Chapter 5 -I will often use quite long names for data structures etc., which is really only in the interest of recoverability or ease of parsing and recognizing things: Sometimes, names such as qwe or asd will be used because they are superfast and virtually error-free to type on an American QWERTY keyboard, but in the long run, i.e., for your real research projects, names such as sentences.without.tags or cleaned.corpus.file are infinitely more revealing than the kind of names (e.g., qwe or aa) I have mostly used so far.
But there are other types of research question for which no standard corpus is available.
The corpus is fully available to the public and can be viewed free of charge via an online interface.
Sociolinguistics is a subfield of linguistics where corpus studies are a possible methodology, alongside surveys and experiments and more.
You can do your data processing, data retrieval, annotation, statistical evaluation, graphical representation .
Dimension scores are calculated for each text sample by adding up standardized frequencies with salient positive loadings and subtracting salient negative loadings on a dimension.
This point is crucial considering how additional target children multiply the amount of time and money required to compile a corpus with minimum annotation standards.
Here, we discuss issues related to the reliability of the database with respect to OCR (Optical Character Recognition) accuracy as well as problems pertaining to the balance of the database and the metadata associated with it.
After testing the appropriateness of the corpus for the research, the researcher needs to find suitable software tools to conduct the study, code the results and then analyze them through appropriate statistical tests.
We now treat the 𝜒 2 component as a 𝜒 2 value in its own right, checking it for statistical significance in the same way as the overall 𝜒 2 value.
Exclusivity refers to a specific aspect of the collocation relationship where words occur only or predominantly in each other's company.
Among the highest-ranking nouns of this type is lifespan, followed by words such as database, policeman and classroom.
The simplest way of solving the problem of different sample sizes is to create samples of equal size for the purposes of comparison.
For our purposes, we will test whether the data annotation for such a study could be done semi-automatically.
We will do two case studies; one will be based on the Chinese-Hong Kong data from the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE), the other on the Brown corpus of the ICAME CD-ROM version 2 (as before, see the end of this section if you do not have access to either corpus).
Then, we will present two types of descriptive statistics that, respectively, make it possible to measure lexical diversity (the type/token ratio), and to calculate lexical dispersion in a corpus.
Mean document length normalization involves transformation of the row vectors of the data matrix in relation to the average length of documents in the corpus being used, and, in the present case, transformation of the row vectors of MDECTE in relation to the average length of the m = 63 DECTE phonetic transcriptions, as in Equation (3.17).
Users of the corpus will therefore be able to study the development over time of both individual words as well as a variety of different syntactic structures.
This section presents an overview of a recent study and findings on four syntactic features of spoken ELF carried out on a subset of the ELFA corpus.
The Le Monde corpus is a valuable tool not only for exploring the French journalistic style but also for studying recent developments in the language, thanks to its data spanning 25 years.
As this textbook is more practical in nature than other textbooks on corpus linguistics, at the end of almost all chapters, I've also added a section entitled 'Sources and Further Reading'.
If we have chosen unrepresentative data or if we have extracted or annotated our data sloppily, the statistical significance of the results is meaningless.
Therefore, rules are often used to describe to a computer when to label a word with a particular category or another and then a tagger is run over the corpus.
Social scientists have developed mathematical formulas that enable a researcher to calculate the number of samples they will need to take from a sampling frame to produce a representative sample of the frame.
So while these authors have ample anecdotal evidence to suggest that bootstrapping methods need to be better understood, generally, it seems that their application in corpus linguistics research has gotten off to a great start.
Today, searches in large corpora and the even larger masses of text stored in digital archives will do the same job much more effectively, and numerous ante-datings are in fact reported regularly.
In situations like these, it is possible to train some kinds of annotation software to apply new tagging conventions to your corpus sources.
In order to develop this understanding thoroughly, as so often in corpus linguistics we need to look at this task from at least two different angles, a theoretical and a practical one.
Instead of a list of collocates displayed in a table (the usual format), the graph shows the relationship between the node and the collocates by displaying collocates closer to or further apart from the node.
This definition has been understood by collocation researchers in two different (but related) ways.
The application of the random sampling method usually saves a corpus from being skewed and less representative.
Buysse (2020) compared the oral productions of French-speaking and Dutch-speaking learners of English in the LINDSEI corpus with the productions of native English speakers in the LOCNEC corpus, a corpus which was compiled to be comparable with the LINSDEI (see Chapter 4 for a definition of the concept of comparability).
To sum up, in this section, we have defined corpus linguistics as an empirical discipline, which observes and analyzes quantitative language samples gathered in a computerized format.
Free software such as VocabProfile online (www.lexutor.ca/vp) or AntWordProfiler offline (www.antlab.sci.waseda.ac.jp/) allows a teacher to input a text which is then returned with the lexis color-coded according to the frequency of each word in the BNC or COCA corpus.
Additionally, verb and particle lemma grouping factors are annotated.
XML has been designed to be Unicode-aware right from the very beginning, so as to allow for markup using different character sets, also within one and the same document.
Select the 'Collocates' tab, type in fair as your search term and set the 'Min.
The next fifteen columns correspond to the text categories.
The nonstandard indirect word order occurs both in wh-type questions (e.g.
In these cases, we have to create our own annotation schemes.
Both types of analysis have something to contribute to corpus-based language study.
While syntactic structures can be assigned to sentences manually (and may be necessary when developing a corpus for a language for which few syntacticallyannotated corpus resources have already been developed; see Sect.
The corpus that you will be building for your project will likely not be a large general corpus but will be a smaller, "specialized" corpus that is designed to answer the specific research question(s) you are investigating.
With regard to the use of a corpus for academic purposes, there are also problems with ethical 'right, wrong, legal or illegal'.
The literature draws a distinction between corpus-driven and corpusbased linguistics, where the former is taken to be a scientific paradigm in the sense that behaviourist and generative linguistics are paradigms, that is, ontologies in terms of which linguistic theories can be stated, and the latter to be a methodology, that is, a collection of techniques for the formulation and testing of hypotheses within some already-existing paradigm.
Finally, we use abline and text to add some annotation into the plot; we use lines(lowess(...)) to add a trendline, and I introduce mtext to add colored axis labels.
Analysis of rhetorics sheds new insights into the theme and structure of a text.
The area of research/application where dispersion has gained most ground is that of corpus-based dictionaries and vocabulary lists.
One point that is made in the chapters is that fewer letters written by women are in the corpus than letters written by men.
For instance, the use of these connectives could be compared only in the source language section of the parallel corpus.
So the lemmatisation does not always group elements together; in some cases it can draw distinctions between elements that are superficially identical.
While it is not found in a large number of studies, its use seems to be on the rise to answer questions in corpus-based variationist linguistics.
As such, they can refer to either a particular format for enriching a text, so as to r categorise parts thereof, or r make these parts more salient, or to the actual process of applying this form of annotation.
It may be tempting, in corpus linguistics in general and in LCR in particular, to limit the analysis to a quantitative approach.
Metadata will also provide information about other situational characteristics, for instance, what register and genre properties a text has, what its global topic is, etc.
For the stylistic analysis of one of Pope's poems, for instance, norms with varying contextual relationships include English eighteenth-century poetry, the corpus of Pope's work, all poems written in English in rhymed pentameter couplets, or, for greater contrast as well as comparison, the poetry of Wordsworth.
Each variable R. Schäfer from the fixed effects part of the formula which we expect to vary by LEMMA is simply repeated before the | symbol.
In other words, the maxim for the development of tagsets -and annotation systems more generally -is not that they are linguistically 100% accurate but that they are useful and overall consistent in their operationalisation.
Step 2: State your null hypothesis: H 0 -There is no relationship between type of article use and clause position.
If you want to see frequency statistics for a given directory, you can also use the 'show stats' button and a new text window will open, presenting you with detailed descriptive statistics.
Interestingly, this variability also appears in the native corpus, where it is actually the most marked of all (sub)corpora.
Describing corpus linguistics as a 'field' or subdiscipline of linguistics is a statement which requires qualification, however.
This requires that texts be similar in two regards: text data format and pre-processing and annotation.
Perceived shortcomings relating to the size, scope (and representativeness and reusability) and the level of availability of current multimodal corpora have been mentioned, along with some of the challenges regarding the representation and analysis of multimodal corpora.
Take 100 instances of complement clauses and mark each for who uses them in terms of age and educational background (hopefully, this information will be available in the corpus).
To find out what the current working directory is, type getwd() in the code editor and run the code.
Words used by different characters in classic literary works have been a very popular topic for keyword analyses.
In that case, additional annotation for specific categories is probably needed.
It can create the nearly 70,000 KWIC results for the word "the" in the 1-million-word Brown corpus (a notoriously slow search) in under 1 sec on a modest computer.
However, as the corpus architecture grows more complex or 'multilayered', the pressure to separate annotations into different files and/or more complex formats grows.
The first stage involves proofreading each individual sample in a corpus with samples being placed into a "proofread 1" directory.
The search for adjectives to the left, with the syntax [tag = "ADJ"] [lemma = "film"] results in the adjectives meilleur, prochain, nouveau and seul.
What scientific considerations do suggest for a general corpus is that we should include a large range of text varieties with different situational characteristics, including large proportions of spoken and/or signed text varieties in the interest of greater representativeness.
One might assume that punctuation, something we use all the time in order to delimit 'sentences' from one another, is fairly unambiguous, but, as you may also have noticed, once we start exploring all the varied functions the different punctuation marks may perform in a text, we may be quite surprised by their capacity for creating ambiguity.
Rather than seeing the relative frequency in terms of percentages as in BNCweb, though, the bars on the right-hand side provide us with a visual indication of the extent to which each sub-form of the lemma contributes to the total.
For the investigation of grammatical structures such as passives, which are generally fairly common, even a small corpus (e.g.
The size of the search window can be widened or narrowed depending upon how much text is desired both before and after the search term.
Such manual sorting tasks can actually be avoided if the words in the corpus have been previously annotated into grammatical categories.
Combining the levels of GRAID and RefIND annotations will open up further possibilities: for instance, we can search for all instances where an annotation appears on the RefIND tier combined with a search for a syntactic function on the GRAID tier to get all functions in which a discourse referent is introduced.
For example, Charteris-Black (2005) investigates a corpus of "right-wing communication and media reporting" on immigration, containing speeches, political manifestos and articles from the conservative newspapers Daily Mail and Daily Telegraph.
This means that there are two independent variables that can be used to make predictions about the TTR values of any given text: One independent variable is time, which is a continuous variable expressed in a continuous sequence of numbers that represent successive years.
This really only makes sense if you're planning to put the result into a relational database for complex analysis and annotation, and where you'll automatically be able to look up what the numbers mean from a lookup table.
Inspect the results visually by reading through them and trying to identify roughly what kind of a distribution in terms of nouns and verbs you may have in your random sample.
This is because every two corpora are different in a number of aspects which get highlighted to different degrees in the keyword procedure.
As backchannels constitute text where another speaker simply provides feedback to the current speaker who holds the turn, but doesn't really interrupt to take over, it also makes sense to incorporate this via an empty element.
This chapter describes the process of analyzing a completed corpus.
Some corpora, such as the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English, are prosodically transcribed and contain detailed features of intonation, such as pitch contours, pauses, and intonation boundaries (cf.
Once the index was complete, the list was further analyzed and restructured in a process of lemmatization.
But despite the difference in length, each corpus contains many of the same registers, such as fiction, press reportage, and academic writing.
While it is relatively easy to carry out lexical studies with corpus-driven approaches (whether you rely on existing corpora or analyze your own corpus), as available tools allow you to extract lexical patterns from the texts, it is quite difficult to apply corpus-driven approaches to do a full lexico-grammatical analysis of texts.
In this same corpus, what are the five most frequently observed co-occurrences and the five most probable collocations for the word élève(s)?
When those pages, however, are then opened on a computer in another country, and which is set to a different code page, the result may look very similar to, or even worse than, the result we get when we set the exercise to any encoding that is different from UTF-8.
In order to collect this much -or rather, little -text, we'd probably need the equivalent of about 2.4 to 3 pages of scanned text, as the number of words in texts roughly varies between 250 per page for double-spaced texts of average font size (i.e.
If, for instance, we have a corpus containing both writing and speech, we may on occasion wish to search just within the spoken texts, or to compare the results of some analysis in the written data versus the spoken data.
Compared to carefully constructed traditional corpora with often hand-picked text samples, there is obviously much less control over individual choices, and the fact that the exact 8.
Finally, the mean dimension score for each register is calculated by taking all text dimension scores belonging to the same register and calculating the average value.
It would be surprising if corpus linguistics was an exception, and indeed, it is not.
All collocational analyses have to be conducted by running a query on the node word first.
Finally, we use the function barplot to plot the observed percentages of "perl" in the corpus parts and customize the plot.
The term 'annotation layer' refers to the issue of whether different types of annotation are integrated together in one linear transcription or whether they are represented individually on separate layers.
This allows a corpus to reflect on the linguistic changes that take place in a language over time.
This type of study should also compare acquisition processes in spoken and written data.
There is a limit to the effectiveness of normalization, however, and it has to do with the probabilities with which the linguistic features of interest occur in the corpus.
This also extends into the choice of annotation tools, as one can use separate tools, for example to annotate syntax trees, typographical properties of source documents, or discourse annotations.
Consequently, corpus linguists are very skeptical of the highly abstract and decontextualized discussions of language promoted by generative grammarians, largely because such discussions are too far removed from actual language usage.
Our analysis also allows for a degree of uncertainty, as the annotation targets the predominant use in a cluster.
Moreover, although authenticity is not a demarcation criterion for corpora, spoken texts in particular should come from common text varieties as well and not be restricted to scripted or semi-scripted TV, radio, or otherwise broadcasted texts or texts elicited in experimental setups.
By means of corpus studies, it is also possible to define lexical fields and to study meaning relations between words, such as synonymy and anonymity.
So, if our token is she, in the sentence the cat jumped on the couch and then she went to sleep, and has the same referent as the cat, the antecedent of she is the cat.
Type I and type II errors are part and parcel of the procedure.
The following is a brief sample paragraph that illustrates what a paragraph annotated in XML might look like in terms of elements and attributes.
This is obvious from the visual scatter in both plots, but also just from simple math: If a researcher reports an adjusted frequency of 35 for a word, one does not know whether that word occurs 35 perfectly evenly distributed times in the corpus (i.e., frequency = 35 and, say, Juilland's D = 1) or whether it occurs 350 very unevenly distributed times in the corpus (i.e., frequency = 350 and, say, Juilland's D = 0.1).
In the final brief section (Chapter 11), I've tried to provide you with a short, but nevertheless highly practical, glimpse at what current technology in the form of XML has to offer to linguists who want to enrich their data and/or visualise important facts inherent in it.
The main, "create_kwic_concordance" function is designed to accept five parameters: (1) the corpus location, (2) an option to ignore case when searching, (3) the search term, (4) a context size that defines how many tokens to the left and right of the search term will be shown in the KWIC results, and (5) a file path for the results file (lines 15-20).
A parallel corpus, containing translations, would not be able to meet these two objectives.
For instance, the iweb Corpus is 14 billion words in length and is searchable online.
The word immeuble is the second most frequent word, with 20,133 occurrences, making it the 6,633th most frequent word in the corpus and corresponding to frequency class number 12.
As you can see, in this basic form, concordancing is very similar to a Google search, only that it shows you the results in one or more pre-selected pieces of text, rather than trying to find them online.
Accordingly, corpus linguistics is bound to be, and has been, used as one methodological approach amongst many in studies which use mixed methods and orient to triangulation.
The compilers eventually arrived at a very elaborate coding scheme to describe the letter writers in their corpus, using 27 different parameters, some with very open information.
In a second step, the resulting curve of changing productivity is used to divide the development into diachronic stages.
Attempts at creating such pre-fabricated word lists for EAP from corpus materials have already been made in the past.
Moreover, it is advisable for corpus linguists to be cognisant of such concepts and the debates surrounding them, as these are likely to colour the perception that social scientists form of corpus linguistics.
AntConc uses a different concept of 'word' from BNCweb, based on the token definitions you've chosen, and may thus throw an error when it encounters something that doesn't fit this definition, aborting the keyword list comparison.
We can refer to the former type as snapshot corpora, whereas the common term for the latter is monitor corpora.
A list of 500 words that accounts for 15% of the running words in a target corpus would have more pedagogical value than a similarly purposed list accounting for only 5% of a corpus, as that increased coverage suggests increased impact.
At 3 years and 5 months old, the most frequent word was ça with 54 occurrences, and her type/token ratio was 0.21.
After these steps have been performed, the corpus can then be tokenised, lemmatised and part-of-speech tagged using the standard approaches described in Chap.
Regarding the latter, you may now, quite rightly, expect to find at least the other two question words what and who in the same concordance list, as they can certainly be followed by the same clitic, but, due to the tagging rules of CLAWS, these are in fact classified in different ways from the other question words.
And, of course, you could always also use smaller corpora (or parts of the BNC itself) and investigate these in a concordancer like AntConc, where the sorting options make things easier for you.
In this language, the elements of a text are marked up using named tags including one or more attributes.
In contrast, those creating second generation corpora have had the advantage of numerous technological advances that have automated the process of corpus creation.
If one computes the MI of in spite of in the untagged Brown corpus by comparing the observed frequency of in spite of of 54 against an expected frequency based on complete independence, MI becomes an extremely high value of 12.25.
Typically, a longitudinal corpus includes a recording of a few hours, gathered every one to three weeks.
Then, we will describe the different parts of a research study and provide some guidelines for writing up and presenting your research project as well as suggest some approaches to how your corpus project can be assessed.
However, this degree of power does come at a cost: In the beginning, it is undoubtedly more difficult to do things with R than with ready-made (free or commercial) concordancing software that has been written specifically for corpus-linguistic applications.
First generation corpora, such as Brown and LOB, were relatively short (each of one million words in length), mainly because of the logistical difficulties that computerizing a corpus created.
It will do so in a way that should not only provide you with the technical skills for such an analysis for your own research purposes, but also raise your awareness of how corpus evidence can be used in order to develop a better understanding of the forms and functions of language.
For example, the GATE system (General Architecture for Text Engineering) now runs in the cloud, and on a smaller scale, so do Wmatrix and CQPweb.
For instance, the West Virginia Corpus of English in Appalachia includes word lists, reading passages, and casual conversations from 67 speakers, who are of different ages, sexes, regions, family backgrounds, occupations, and orientations to social institutions (cf.
We can compare between corpora or within a corpus (for example, for different speaker roles such as questioner and responder) and we can compare a specialized corpus to a general (or "heterogeneric") one.
To illustrate the point of the relative heterogeneity of any two corpora, let's compare two excerpts taken from a corpus of American (AmE06) and a corpus of British (BE06) English respectively, each excerpt consisting of exactly 100 words.
Headers contain various kinds of information about the text.
The overall topic is a study of the discourse type of White House press briefings during the opening period of the Arab Uprisings.
From the 1 million word Brown corpus of the 1960s to the 100 million word BNC of the 1990s, the resources used by researchers in the field have conventionally been of known (usually finite) size.
Let us further assume that we can assign all other uses of pavement in the sample to the reading 'paved surface', and that two of the four examples of sidewalk in the British English corpus are genuine counterexamples.
Then, we use plot, text, abline, and lines(lowess(...)) for the scatterplot and cor.test for the correlation.
Furthermore, it is worth pointing out that in research, there is a growing trend away from ready-made concordance tools and towards writing and adapting scripts written in programming environments like Python or R (e.g.
Notable differences between lists would suggest limitations to their generalizability, and, ultimately, to the representativeness of the corpus upon which they were based.
Because you do not want this information counted as part of the linguistic characteristics of your text, you can put this or any other relevant information that you do not want to be a part of the linguistic analysis into angled brackets (< >).
CQPweb, Sketch Engine) include punctuation in token counts.
As mentioned above, without narrowing down the scope of a corpus, it is impossible to create a corpus representing everything related to all areas of language and texts appearing in the language.
In other words, just as collocation is a by-product of the existence of units of meaning, so patterns are a byproduct of frequently occurring semantic sequences.
Apart from re-using and enriching existing spoken corpora, future corpus-based research might also increasingly make use of combining existing corpora for U.
We expect higher rates (or counts of something like a type of word) when there is more opportunity to observe the event being counted (i.e., longer texts have more words).
Other corpora have kept different information on individuals, relevant to the particular corpus being created.
Linguists analyzing this corpus would draw totally incorrect conclusions about the language in question, since this person does not represent the linguistic competence of a typical speaker.
Bootstrapping does not increase the n size of a sample.
In other words, a word+construction combination with a high collostruction strength in a given corpus may actually not occur particularly frequently.
Such results can only be obtained by dense corpus studies allowing us to detect relatively rare phenomena such as passive constructions.
In the simplest case, this consists in accepting the operational definitions used by the makers of a particular corpus (as well as the interpretative judgments made in applying them).
Thus, the notion of corpus is really a rather diverse one.
Suppose we want to know whether the connective car was used consistently by the 10 students who compiled a dossier in the Littéracie avancée corpus (L2_DOS_SORB sub-corpus).
As you'll hopefully have noticed, apart from simply giving us the option to look at/sort by the statistic or frequency of the collocates, AntConc also allows us to see or sort by whether the results occur on left-or right-hand side of the node, and with which frequency.
The Wellington Corpus (New Zealand) and Limerick Corpus of Irish English are two other national corpora with spoken English represented.
The size of a corpus should be set against the diversity of texts to achieve proper representation.
Consequently, different corpora contained different kinds of markup to describe the same linguistic phenomena.
These modes differ from written texts in that the raw data is not readily amenable to inclusion in our corpus.
In some cases, it can therefore be useful to publish a corpus in password-protected form, even though generally, the ideal should of course be maximal accessibility.
This choice reflects speakers' effort to find a balance between explicitness and economy.
SEMANTICS could be a factor encoding the semantic classes which nest individual lemmas.
Parts IV-VI aim to offer a user-friendly introduction to the variety of statistical techniques that have been used, or have started to be used, more extensively in corpus linguistics.
Therefore, we can furnish a general corpus with standard text samples of contemporary writings and a calculated and proportional representation of texts can suffice our requirement.
Contemporary corpora are used for studying language in a synchronic way, that is, at a given moment during its evolution, whereas historical corpora make it possible to carry out studies from a diachronic point of view, that is, on the evolution of language.
In this case, a series of linguistic indicators are used for measuring the formal similarities between this text and other reference works by different possible authors.
Thus, given its robustness, high reliability, flexibility, and potential for reusability and replicability, it is at least worth considering whether this (semi-)automated data annotation procedure could be what is next for corpus linguistic methodology.
The operationalization phase must therefore lead to the decision to use an existing resource, for example among those described in Chapter 5 or, to create a new corpus, according to the principles introduced in Chapter 6.
But linguistic corpora do not (and cannot) contain only well-known authors, and so checking the individual demographic data for every speaker in a corpus may be difficult to impossible.
In summary, a corpus can be analyzed using a quantitative or qualitative methodology.
Please bear in mind, though, that for the former type of exercise, simply following the steps blindly without trying to understand why you're doing them will not allow you to learn properly.
Section 5.3.2), and with complex scales combining a range of different dimensions, this is probably a good idea; but ordinal data also have a useful place in quantitative corpus linguistics.
In corpus linguistic practice, however, annotators have often resorted to alternative renditions of IPA conventions.
Another extra-textual feature can be the time the text was produced: whether the text comes from the year 1920 or 2015.
The author has a clear role in controlling the text and refers to the parties of the dispute known to all with general nouns: THO I have been much solicited, to shew my Opinion, about the Debate betwixt the two Physicians, concerning .
Or we could search a corpus for all passages mentioning cars and hope that one of them mentions the forward-facing window; alternatively, we could search for grammatical contexts in which we might expect the word to be used, such as ⟨ through the NOUN of POSS.PRON car ⟩ (see Section 4.1 in Chapter 4 on how such a query would have to be constructed).
Topics discussed include how to create a "header" for a particular text.
Let us look at what a corpus might tell us about splitting infinitives.
When the crawl is eventually complete, several other steps are usually carried out to 'clean up' the downloaded web documents before they are added to a corpus.
As we've seen before, the very first electronic corpus, the Brown Corpus of written American English, contained 500 (written) text samples of 2,000+ words, and its size and composition set a standard for the compilation of new corpora for many years.
The reports or articles presenting this type of results generally follow a very precise structure.
This is not always possible to achieve, but most statistical tests assume that the sample is drawn randomly A 'distribution' is a mathematical function which can in some cases serve as a Distribution model fair (but not necessarily perfect) model of the population we wish to study.
In total, this corpus includes 200 articles which correspond to approximately 400,000 words.
The corpus is made up of 11 sub-sections containing at least 10 texts each, produced under similar conditions, namely by students of the same level.
These kinds of corpora take a lot of work to produce, much more so if (portions of) the corpus have been manually inspected, checked for accuracy, and hand-corrected.
Second, corpus-based studies have shown that dialect variation can involve a much wider range of linguistic variables than is generally analyzed in dialectology and sociolinguistics.
Another is how dispersion measures relate to issues outside of corpus linguistics such as, again, psycholinguisticallyor cognitively-informed approaches.
On the other hand, it is simply not feasible to annotate a 100-million-word corpus using human annotators (though advances in crowdsourcing technology may change this), so we are stuck with a choice between using a tagger or having no POS annotation at all.
The Introduction defined corpus linguistics for the purposes of the present discussion as a methodology in the service of the science of language.
The other type abstracts a new and usually much smaller set of variables on the basis of the existing ones.
However, we sometimes have to work with the sample we happen to have available, like in historical linguistics.
The authors then manually classified 50 occurrences of each connective found in the spoken and written modes as either objective or subjective, that is, a total of 200 occurrences, randomly chosen from the corpus.
Part II for the settings typically associated with different corpus methods).
In addition to punctuation, other sources of variation in token counting include: treatment of clitics (e.g.
Some proponents of 'pure' XML technology would even frown upon what we've done here and argue that XML was meant to be processed by the computer, anyway, and could then be rendered in whichever way it would be best viewed.
Depending on different research questions, the corpus could also be loaded with all three time periods.
If you are interested in the sequence a baby, it occurs more than 10,000 times in the same corpus, and if you are interested in the sequence like a baby, you will see that it occurs more than 600 times in COCA.
But as corpus linguistics developed alongside the dominant paradigm of generative grammar, obvious differences and disputes resulted.
The second important question concerns the size of the sample that will be included in the corpus.
The type of English used 150 years ago in the United States is quite different from the type of English used in the United States today.
For instance, when we annotate a text at an anaphora level, there is no apparent information available in a text-based on which we can identify how words are linked with others in relation to co-reference.
This process is guided by the ultimate use of the corpus.
As we will see below, in the field of stylistics, corpus linguistics tools do not seek to replace qualitative analysis, but only aim to guide the choice of themes and excerpts to analyze.
A conversation includes many situational clues to interpreting language such as eye gaze, gesture, facial expressions, tone of voice for spoken language, as well as means to establish common ground between conversational partners, all of which written text lacks, which should affect language choices.
Do you see any difference between the two registers in terms of the percentage of frequent (or not frequent) words in the text?
Genre context already moves on a more abstract level as genres are generalizations made on the basis of individual texts, and placing a text in its genre context reveals some of its meaning.
There are many linguistic and technical issues relating to corpus sanitation (e.g., text normalization, orthographic error correction, spelling error correction, real word-error correction, grammatical error correction, punctuation error removal, and tokenization).
In this paper I shall present a view of Corpus Linguistics that conceptualises it in three phases, distinguished by the use made in each phase of quantitative data.
It is a well-known fact in corpus linguistics that words occur in combinations that we call collocations.
The Clusters and Collocates tabs help you to identify the collocations spotted in the corpus, as well as the most likely collocations.
We can turn this claim into a hypothesis involving two variables (Variety and Suffix Variant), but not one of the type "All x are y".
The most frequent singular noun consisting of two roots on the list is chairman, and other nouns of this type include football, newspaper, background, and bedroom.
Our goals in the Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics (CHECL) are to survey the breadth of these research questions and applications in relation to the linguistic study of English.
In many ways we can then say that the challenges do not only relate to corpora and their use themselves, but also to how we educate new corpus users and inform them about the fundamental concepts and concerns.
The coefficient of variation (CV) describes the amount of variation relative to the mean relative frequency of a word or phrase in the corpus.
The BNC is probably the most well-known corpus focused on a national variety.
However, before, say, "pressing down" can be used as an operational definition, at least three questions need to be asked: first, what type of object is to be used for pressing (what material it is made of and what shape it has); second, how much pressure is to be applied; and third, how the "difficulty" of pressing down is to be determined.
First, tools which provide Computer Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis (CAQDAS), such as ATLAS.ti, NVivo, QDA Miner, and Wordstat, incorporate some very similar methods to those described here but are not widely used in corpus linguistics.
The Corpus écrit de français langue étrangère or Lund CEFLE Corpus brings together texts produced by Swedish learners of French, aged between 16 and 19 years with varying skill levels.
In the case of many other phenomena, however, automatic annotation is simply not possible, or yields a quality so low that it simply does not make sense to base queries on it.
In this project, you will use both COHA (Corpus of Historical American English) and COCA to investigate these different meanings of the word sustainable (and its noun counterpart, sustainability) over time and across registers.
With news texts it is also much easier to determine publication date: something which can be very difficult to do on the web in general (see Representative Corpus 1 for information on the NOW corpus).
It should also be noted that they can be easily extended or adapted to carry out tasks that are quite difficult or impossible to achieve with the most popular tools used in corpus linguistics today.
To compare the two lists, you can either use the button on the 'Word List' or the 'Keyword List' tab, and then switch to the other tab, ideally positioning the two windows side-by-side.
At the end of the corpus, Anne produced 230 word types against 182 for Max, which tends to confirm that her language was more advanced.
Both devices project the author as a participant in the text, indicating that the writer is prepared to debate issues and contribute half of a dialogue with readers.
The following is a brief summary of desiderata for suitable plain-text editors.
With the CONE and GraphColl prototypes, we have proposed and illustrated a highly dynamic way of exploring collocation networks, as an example of our wish to add dynamic elements to both existing and novel visualisations.
Now, even if you are aware of all the relevant forms you may need to identify, and search for each of these forms separately in a row in a concordance program, you can only save the results, maybe even print them out, and then compare them afterwards.
Updated versions of corpus software are being delivered on a regular basis; however, the corpus toolkit is in need of a methodological overhaul on a number of fronts.
Furthermore, the design of the annotation and interfaces available may sometimes exhibit flaws from a linguistic perspective, as we've, for instance, seen for the CQP architecture behind BNCweb, which treats punctuation tokens in exactly the same way as genuine words, thereby potentially skewing all the statistics produced by the tool.
A book that discusses the history and epistemology of corpus linguistics only to the extent necessary to grasp these methodological issues and that presents case studies of a broad range of linguistic phenomena from a coherent methodological perspective.
In what follows we will attempt to outline ways in which corpus-assisted discourse studies (CADS) can help build upon traditional qualitative linguistic analysis, what "added value" it can bring.
As such, the case study to be presented in the section that follows will explore collocation and semantic prosody in two genetically distant languages, English and Chinese in this case, from a cross-linguistic perspective rather than in a monolingual context.
First, corpus-based studies have shown that dialect variation exists across a wide range of different varieties of language, including forms of written and standard language, where dialect patterns had never been sought or even believed to exist.
Similarly, the words mouse and mice are the singular and plural variants of the same lemma (mouse), whereas eat, eaten and eating are the conjugated forms of the lemma eat.
We'll experience the advantages of this when we set up/work with accounts for access to some web-based corpus interfaces, such as BNCweb or COCA.
When you count how often each type occurs in a particular corpus, you usually get a skewed distribution such that 1 a few types -usually short function words -account for the lion's share of all tokens (for example, in the Brown corpus, the ten most frequent types out of approximately all 41,000 different types (i.e., only 0.02 percent of all word types) already account for nearly 24 percent of all tokens); and 2 most tokens occur rather infrequently (for example, 16,000 of the tokens in the Brown corpus occur only once).
Conversely, many other annotations made on corpus studies are devoted to a single type of element to be studied.
The need to use a large amount of data and the desire to quantify the presence of linguistic elements in a corpus corresponds to a quantitative research methodology.
For hitherto under-studied languages, this stage may involve much more research and identification of text varieties as part of linguistic and/or ethnographic fieldwork of a language community.
However, they are unsuitable for research questions that require data processing, for example, some kind of annotation or those that have to take into account a large context, in order to identify certain linguistic phenomena such as speech acts or discursive phenomena.
However, I still refer to this as 'Simple XML' because it remains easily readable due to the relatively low number of container elements and the separation of text from nonempty tags.
By using the function xmlGetAttr with a specification of which attribute we want (which I hope is reminiscent of the function attr discussed above): Finally, let us do some more advanced searches, searches that tap into different kinds and levels of annotation at the same time.
If you want to conduct research with this corpus, you have to go to the University of Oslo to reach the corpus.
Second and more interestingly, the above two models were fitted with user-defined orthogonal contrasts-something else that happens way too rarely in corpus linguistics-to see easily (i) whether the speakers of an unknown sex are different from those where the sex is known, and (ii) whether female and male speakers behave differently.
The book reflects the needs of students and researchers who are looking for a practical guidebook on corpus statistics, which is grounded in the current literature in the field and reflects the best practice.
What is the difference between metadata and textual markup?
In the example given above, within a 1L, 1R collocation window around each occurrence of the node, we can observe the words that co-occur with love, namely, in the order of appearance, my (three times), is (twice), in (once), am (once), will (twice), thee (twice), only (once), and (once) and thou (once).
In order to talk about these problems, in this chapter, I use the words "long" and "short" to refer to texts which are and are not long enough for typical quantitative corpus-linguistic analysis, respectively, though the line between the two is of course fuzzy.
Indeed, our initial enthusiasm was quickly dampened by the observation that the connective use of as well was dispersed very unevenly in the corpus.
This restriction allows for a certain degree of flexibility as well, as it would permit a variety of different speakers and writers of British English to be represented in the corpus.
For a general corpus of editorials to be "balanced," the editorials would have to be taken from the various sources in which the editorials are found, such as newspapers, magazines, perhaps even blogs.
This hypothesis has been partly confirmed through corpus studies, performed on a single language pair and limited to one translation direction.
We have also seen that these tools often work in standardized formats like XML, which makes it easy to share annotations.
This difference is not due to the respective sample sizes: the fiction section in the BNC is much larger than the newspaper section; thus, the difference token frequency would suggest that the suffix is more important in newspaper language than in fiction.
R and RStudio are the two software tools that will be used in the rest of the handbook to describe a set of statistical techniques available to corpus linguists.
While it is true that laws differ from country to country, it is not possible to distribute the texts of an author during his/her lifetime without demanding some type of compensation.
Our main argument was that the recent trends and advances in the field, such as the publication of big-data corpora, the increased reliance on statistical approaches to linguistic data, and the exploitation of various kinds of metadata, require that the linguist should have a detailed understanding of the structure of the corpus, its sampling procedure, and the principles followed in the construction of the metadata.
Problems and challenges are also there in the annotation of medical texts, texts of court proceedings, conversational texts, multimodal texts (where audio-visual elements are included), mythological texts, and others.
While we acknowledge the use and importance of combining these two approaches, in the rest of the book we will focus on the quantitative approach to corpus linguistics, which poses its own theoretical and methodological challenges.
As is obvious from the above, a lot of corpus-linguistic work does not discuss all their methodological aspects in sufficient detail, but in order to at least begin to approach the ideal of reproducibility, it is essential that all this information be provided at a sufficient level of detail.
The exploration could proceed as described for the structural use case above but would now be extended to cover other levels of linguistic annotation assuming that they were represented in the corpus.
A corpus of journalistic texts includes real productions by journalists, which are not produced for the purpose of being observed.
In the present example with an untagged corpus, for example, there is no additional pattern that seems in any way promising.
We'll discuss the other 'type' in more detail in Section 10.8.
Predictably, I think the answer is still "yes" and "yes, even a second edition," and the reason is that this introduction is radically different from every other introduction to corpus linguistics out there.
The most striking difference in type frequency for types occurring in both subcorpora is that for upon, which occurs more than 10 times as frequently in the general corpus (ratio 10.604).
The application of corpus methodologies to translation research can be traced back to Mona Baker's seminal paper in which she argues that: the most important task that awaits the application of corpus techniques in translation studies .
When analysing corpora, we also need to think about the type and format of the data that needs to be obtained from the corpus in order to answer the research question.
Although each chapter includes a broad summary of previous research, the primary focus is on a more detailed description of the most important corpus-based studies in this area, with discussion of what those studies found and why they are especially important.
On the one hand, corpus linguistics has the advantage of favoring the observation of natural data, that is, those which are not influenced by an experimental context.
However, if you switch the display from random to corpus order, you'll notice that, apparently, not all u-units are in fact retrieved because the KWIC display actually starts with the second unit.
The first computer corpus, the Brown Corpus (a general-purpose corpus), contained various kinds of writing, such as press reportage, fiction, learned, and popular writing.
This may for example happen when the corpus is in a language that uses a different alphabet from the standard Western European ones that are supported on all computers by default.
One additional highly important attribute of the corpus is the fact that it contains a very large amount of meta-information, i.e.
This length of conversation increases the probability that a natural and coherent sample of speech can be extracted from this longer sample.
Each of the following sections is intended to illustrate one general problem associated with historical corpus linguistics by discussing individual studies that we have carried out previously.
For corpus linguists, this involves determining how many text samples need to be included in a corpus to ensure that valid generalizations can be made about the genre, and what range of individuals need to be selected so that the text samples included in a corpus provide a valid representation of the population supplying the texts.
The advantage is that very detailed information about a spoken text is provided to the user, thus ensuring that a broad range of studies can be conducted on the corpus without any doubt about the authenticity of the data.
Given that semantic annotation systems can be exceedingly complex by comparison to grammatical annotation, given the huge range of distinctions, we will not discuss these here in greater detail.
English for Academic Purposes (EAP), a special type of English for Specific Purposes (ESP).
However, using a High Performance Cluster (multiple connected computers running small batches of text) at Lancaster, we were able to complete the task in three days.
While creative (or imaginative) writing was the most common type of writing in the BNC, in the ICE it is not as prominent.
We will finally see that the task of creating a corpus carries with it a certain number of ethical and legal issues which must be dealt with.
Recall that corpus linguistics includes both quantitative and qualitative analysis.
While in corpus linguistics concordancing has become a mainstream method, in literary criticism it does not seem to play a major role.
The review is in two main parts: the first part outlines work on quantitative methods in corpus linguistics to serve as a context for the second, which deals with the cluster analytic work specifically.
Further challenges are involved in the annotation of heritage and classical texts, which require separate tagsets and methods for annotation of mythological characters, events, anecdotes, ecology, and sociocultural properties.
Corpus-based approaches to phraseology, however, have uncovered the essential functions played in language by n-grams or lexical bundles, i.e.
To make it a little easier to understand what the shortcuts do, just try to remember that the basic keyboard combinations without pressing the 'Shift' key -the one that switches between small and capital letters -will only help you to navigate through the document more efficiently, while combining them with 'Shift' will also select the text spans covered by the shortcuts.
Colligation is a type of this kind of higher-level abstraction, which refers to the relationship between words at grammatical level, i.e.
Most concordancers are also stream-based, which means that they 'suppress' line breaks by replacing them with spaces, so that the text is essentially read as a continuous stream of words.
Before opening one or more files for them to be processed with AntConc, we have to make sure that the encoding chosen in AntConc for reading the characters is suitable for reading the file correctly.
Using these operationalizations for the purposes of the case studies in this chapter, I retrieved and annotated a one-percent sample of each construction (the constructions are so frequent that even one percent leaves us with 222 sand 178 of -possessives (the full data set for the studies presented in this and the following two subsections can be found in the Supplementary Online Material, file HKD3).
This database can contain not just information taken from the forms described above but other information as well, such as whether the text has been computerized yet, whether it has been proofread, and so forth.
Corpus linguistics, as a form of data analysis methodology, can of course be carried out on a number of different operating systems, so I'll also try to make recommendations as to which programs may be useful for the most commonly used ones, Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux.
In corpus linguistics, a text is a record of any stretch of language as produced on a specific occasion at some point in time, at some place, and as received or receivable at some place and time.
If you have chosen your favourite keyword list for American English, you might be interested in knowing which procedure was used to identify these keywords.
Size filters are designed to remove very short and very long documents from the corpus.
The concordance of all/both sides allowed us to identify the countries where both government and opposition were urged to show restraint and those where only the government was being blamed for the violence.
For instance, the London-Lund Corpus contains different kinds of spoken British English, ranging from casual conversation to course lectures.
In Chapter 3, we implicitly treated the second issue as a problem of retrieval, noting in passing that we queried our corpus in such a way as to capture all variants of the lemma PAVEMENT.
The data and clustering methodology was, moreover, specified precisely enough for anyone with access to the DECTE corpus to check the results of the analysis.
Each time you run the search, even with the same keyword (by choosing the button "KWIC" in the top left corner of COCA), it will display a different set of randomly selected examples.
So far, the composition of our small 'corpus' has been fairly heterogeneous, which has had a clear effect on our results in making it difficult to identify any interesting recurring 'themes'.
It is also argued that the observed tendencies -such as short-before-long and animate referents firstare in line with synchronic corpus-based and experimental findings about general cognitive principles underlying the framework of probabilistic grammar.
In a best-case scenario, it involves the open availability of the entire corpus the researcher draws on, as well as sharing of concordances, annotations, and analysis scripts (if applicable).
This corpus can be downloaded from the Ortolang platform.
Each of these variables were measured as the percentage of contracted not in a given corpus.
To answer it, the cluster results are supplemented with social data associated with the speakers in the DECTE corpus.
At the same time, barring corpora of very recent history, diachronic data will always present us with important problems, failing to represent all the variation associated with the users and contexts of use, with especially spoken language as the perennial gap.
If you cannot immediately recognise what this means, then I suggest you spend a few minutes thinking about this and maybe even test it on a longer text in AntConc, as described in Section 6.5.
The different purposes of the text are also of interest, especially when seen in relation to the other features.
This is true for inductive keyword analyses as well 10.2 Case studies Many of the examples in the early chapters of this book demonstrate how, in principle, lexical differences between varieties can be investigated -take two sufficiently large corpora representing two different varieties, and study the distribution of a particular word across these two corpora.
Note that this entire corpus -let us call it A Historical Corpus of American News Writing -would consist of three sub-corpora related to each of the three time periods.
Since each quotation in the OED is tagged with its historical date, the concordance could be binned into fifty-year increments, which form the basis for subsequent assessments of productivity.
For example, there are 7 types and 9 tokens for mini-in the 1991 British FLOB corpus (two tokens each for mini-bus and mini-series and one each for mini-charter, mini-disc, mini-maestro, mini-roll and mini-submarine), so the TTR is 7 /9 = 0.7779.
In addition, these corpora often contain an annotation of errors, which favors an explicit learning process and enables learners to become conscious of typical errors and to avoid them.
We test whether the data from that sample "fit" with that of the population.
This has an extremely important consequence: both in psycholinguistics and in corpus linguistics, the vast majority of datasets violate the assumptions of the simplest test that an analyst might normally think of first -namely, that the data points are independent of one another.
This will include paper titles, the type of publication (journal article, book chapter, doctoral dissertation), author names, year of publication, and so forth.
After you have selected a corpus, you will need to create an account to use the corpus.
But can each sentence in the MPC "be considered as a text in its own right"?
Often private texts will, therefore, never make it into a corpus.
This can be especially tricky, as there is often some variation in how these items appear across a corpus (or even within a text); for example, although the hyphenated form, well-being, is clearly the most common option found in the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) (>8000 occurrences), the forms well being and wellbeing each occur several hundred times.
Each file was converted from PDF by saving as text from Adobe Reader.
What concordances, collocate lists and frequency lists have in common is that they are all ways of studying the distribution of linguistic elements in a corpus.
Some corpus software allows the use of the extremely sophisticated system of wildcards called regular expressions.
We can thus annotate events described in a corpus, as well as the links between the various participants in these events.
Essentially, what Elsness is doing in this article is using frequency counts, which are quantitative in nature, to support qualitative claims about the usage of that-deletion in various genres of English in the Brown Corpus.
The model outputs multiple vector representations per token, each corresponding to a different hidden layer in the neural network architecture.
There is also TEI-conformant Textual Markup to describe features occurring within a particular corpus.
Type/token ratio (TTR) expresses the proportion of types (different word forms) relative to the proportion of tokens (running words).
Also, any kind of more advanced corpus statistic -for instance, association measures (see Chap.
On the other hand, assuming (as we did above) that language structure and use are not infinitely variable, size will correlate with the representativeness of a corpus at least to some extent with respect to particular linguistic phenomena (especially frequent phenomena, such as general vocabulary, and/or highly productive processes such as derivational morphology and major grammatical structures).
The results of the annotation will be easily understood and it will be possible to reuse it in future work.
You should definitely also delete all numbers, unless you want to change the token definition to include those, but, as I pointed out before, numbers may take many different forms and their meaning may be difficult to identify.
Earlier corpus studies often focused on the patterning of a small number of individual words (e.g.
The second hypothesis is confirmed for both observations: in the translated component, the most frequent word forms account for a significantly higher percentage of the corpus and the proportion of high-frequency to lowfrequency words is significantly higher.
Dotted lines show the 10th and 20th percentile for the bilingualism score, for all users in the corpus important influence of bilingualism.
But even though it is possible to include coherent text samples in a corpus, creators and users of corpora simply have to acknowledge that corpora are not always suitable for many types of discourse studies, and that those wishing to carry out such studies will simply have to assemble their own corpora for their own personal use.
While the original formulation of the philologist's dilemma is no less relevant for scholars engaged in, say, historical sociolinguistics, we argue that in more grammatically oriented studies that make use of big data, increasing attention should be paid to the corpus itself: to its sampling principles and layers of annotation.
While the terminology of the philosophy of science may be slightly alien to corpus linguists, then, the concepts are not.
We will discuss the particularities of translations as a text genre and show that, due to these particularities, they cannot be used as if they were original language texts.
Here the question of representation is not linked with the language as a whole but with the language used by a particular type of people who are primarily non-native speakers.
These analyses are particularly useful for illustrating the uses to which AMs can be put in that, though they rely on the same test, each makes use of a rather different type of association and for different purposes.
These were the context type and length of the noun phrase.
There are many different descriptive and theoretical frameworks that are used in corpus linguistics.
These 15 columns correspond to the 15 text categories.
In other words, what we're really looking into here is a form of colligation, which, however, is probably a little too finegrained for most purposes.
The most important metadata are the recording date, the identity, birth date, and sex of participants, and the role a participant takes in a given recording (a cover term for kinship relations such as "mother" and functional roles such as "recorder").
If one is creating a corpus of, say, spoken American English, should the speech of only native speakers of American English be included?
This also means that -like representativeness -full saturation is not attainable but only approachable.
This will sort the results based on how many of the documents in the corpus the n-gram occurs in, that is, the dispersion, in descending order.
Everybody who has ever worked in corpus linguistics knows that no corpus will ever be perfect, and that the quality of a corpus depends less on the competence of the researchers involved than on the resources they were able to put into it.
English for Specific Purposes and TESOL Quarterly, founded in 1980 and 1967, respectively, appeared after the turn of the century and have been consistently cited by the corpus linguistics papers.
The Corpus of American Contemporary English is an example of a general corpus.
As demonstrated by the studies reviewed in this chapter, the corpus-based approach to dialectology is a growing field of inquiry that allows for new types of research questions to be pursued and new types of dialect variation to be identified.
Furthermore, new strategies for corpus dissemination are being proposed to ensure long-term access to spoken corpora.
In certain written genres, such as scientific writing, it is often difficult to achieve gender balance because writers in these genres are predominantly malean unfortunate reality of modern society.
What kind of information can you get to know about your text(s) through the Vocabulary Profile Tool?
A thorough synthesis that answers this question would be very useful to corpus linguists.
Such studies have two nominal variables: Culture (operationalized as "corpus containing language produced by members of the culture") and Area of Life (operationalized as "semantic field").
This software can be downloaded for free and used for converting any number of XML, HTML or sometimes even PDF files into text format.
Why we might need such special programs for displaying the text is because we often want to be able to render it with special types of formatting, such as italics, boldface, etc., use a particular layout, or that we want to be able to generate a table of contents automatically in a word-processing application, where this is based on the headings inside the document.
What hypothesis would we formulate before identifying all collocations in the LOB or some specialized corpus (e.g., a corpus of business correspondence, a corpus of flight-control communication or a corpus of learner language)?
As opposed to earlier LCR studies that did not include any statistics, most current studies now follow the general trend in corpus linguistics by providing some sort of statistical analysis.
Lemmatisation is conceptually the most straightforward of the word-level annotations; every word is, simply, annotated with the lemma to which it belongs (where each lemma is represented by its morphological base form, such as go for go, goes and went).
Topic bias is a problem especially in small corpora where each individual text forms a relatively large proportion of the corpus.
The primary purpose of the transcription is to make the spoken text searchable.
Following Plag, let us define neologism as "coined in the 20th century", but let us use a large historical dictionary (the Oxford English Dictionary, 3rd edition) and a large corpus (the BNC) in order to identify words matching this definition; this will give us the opportunity to evaluate the idea that hapax legomena are a good way of operationalizing productivity.
These two corpora inaugurated the modern age of corpus linguistics, although both suffered from limitations: the Brown Corpus was restricted to written, printed material; and the SEU corpus remained on paper until the mid 1970s, when most of the spoken part of it was computerized by Jan Svartvik and became the London-Lund Corpus (LLC).
For instance, we have not yet investigated how a poetic text should be annotated; and what kinds of textual, linguistic, stylistic, prosodic, and figurative annotation techniques we should design and apply to poetic texts.
Searching for such phenomena requires some string information and some annotation.
When it comes to textual coherence (understood here as exercises which do not contain isolated and unrelated sentences), we note marked differences between the books, with EGT featuring only one-third of the exercises with textual coherence and G&B offering 100 percent of exercises displaying textual coherence (even if in some exercise sentences are numbered individually, they form a text or relate to one coherent topic).
Given the increasing availability of historical corpora and regionally-stratified corpora, this method may therefore be a useful addition to the corpus-linguistic toolkit.
As a result, corpus-driven studies of lexical phrases (both continuous and discontinuous) have shown that lexical patterning is ubiquitous in English, and basic to the discourse structure of both spoken and written texts.
Or should we create one file per corpus sub-section?
An example is the Dictionary of Old English Corpus (compiled by Antonette di Paolo Healey and colleagues), which exhausts all Old English texts available down even to the odd Runic inscription.
In principle, any design studying the interaction of lexi-10 Text cal items with other units of linguistic structure can also be applied to specific language varieties.
When each post on each blog was processed, links to other WordPress and Blogger blogs were extracted and added to the crawling list, thus widening the scope of the corpus.
A similar problem to the one above could also exist for the singular and plural forms of the noun guess because they look identical to the base form of the verb and the 3rd person singular present, but luckily an investigation of the data reveals that those don't actually occur in our text.
The values for 1-DP seem to reflect this fact, resulting in consistently lower values when computations are based on a large number of corpus parts.
You can verify this for sil by clicking on it in the 'Word' window, which will take you to a concordance view of the item, where you can also see that this annotation normally appears in angle brackets in the source texts.
With corpus linguistics the basis has broadened and the focus has shifted to common features and everyday practices.
The tagged version of the BROWN corpus does not contain quotation marks because they have intentionally been stripped from the text.
This would allow the teacher to tailor future lessons to the needs of the students as the corpus would help highlight any common or frequent errors and, hopefully, aid in discovering in why this type of error was made.
These corpora certainly have their uses, but they push the definition of a linguistic corpus in the sense discussed above to their limit.
Is it a frequent word in the corpus?
The type of value assigned to any given variable depends on its meaning.
One possibility is to look at each of the 348 cases in the sample and try to determine the gradualness or suddenness of the beginning they denote.
Of course, exploratory methods serve as the basis for the design of predictive modeling, which uses the values found in a sample to predict values for another sample.
To compare the semantic profiles of the prepositions, the preferred and dispreferred nominal collocates of the prepositions are examined in the FrWaC corpus.
However, these differences very obviously depend on the topics of the conversations included in the corpus.
Second, subsequent corpus users can much more easily re-evaluate the accuracy of annotations and potentially modify them or add further annotation detail, as required for any research agenda.
In the years before 2000 and the early 2000s, corpus linguistics tended to be studied by using enormous empirical datasets.
However, as extensively discussed in Section 9.1.1, token frequency cannot be used to base such statements on.
This is not simply a matter of finding a balance, but constantly exploring new ways of approaching language so that possibilities of finding new knowledge constantly come into view.
A typical example of this type of data is the corpus that contains newspaper archives or parliamentary debates.
We contend that the studies critically examined here exemplify many of the strengths of corpus pragmatics.
In addition to informative writing, the corpus contains differing types of imaginative prose, such as general fiction and science fiction.
A little example of something I came across in an undergrad corpus linguistics course was that we generated a concordance of in and found that in one of the SGML-annotated files of the BNC that we looked at, the word in was tagged as VBZ, which means "third person singular form of to be".
As a matter of fact, a larger corpus increases the probability of finding more occurrences of a phenomenon.
Post-hoc tests are pair-wise comparisons of individual group means (similar to the t-test discussed above) with a correction for multiple testing; with multiple testing the probability of a falsely positive result (a so-called type I error) increases.
In contrast, the exploratory investigation that we present in our case study employs a corpus-driven approach to directly identify the important discontinuous frames in speech and writing.
Here, too, corpus linguistics provides useful tools, for example to determine whether the choice between affixes is influenced by syntactic, semantic or phonological properties of stems.
It has been argued that an explanation for cooccurrence of lexeme and structure may sometimes be found in the more extensive co-text.
That is, the use of first person pronouns will depend on the class size (lecture versus seminar-type).
Incidentally, the level of redundancy would increase even further if we analysed the whole text, including the front matter, because there the headings might show up once more inside the table of contents (TOC) of the document, where their meaning is 'purely' to serve as a navigational aid by listing them side by side with their respective page numbers.
The purpose of these studies is to investigate how their own texts place on the existing continuum of variation and in this sense have a corpus-informed component to them.
All these reasons call for new visualisation techniques, or at least the adaptation of existing ones, in order to specifically address the particular needs of corpus linguistics in terms of scalability, and support for iterative exploration.
In this case, two scenarios are possible: either the conclusions of the study will be limited to the editorial style, or the corpus should be diversified in view of including other types of journalistic texts.
If we're working in the area of lexicography, though, and are trying to create a comprehensive dictionary of a particular type of (sub-)language, we may well want to start with an alphabetically sorted list first, and then investigate the individual types according to their specific features that would allow us to classify and describe them optimally.
The assumption is that very short documents are unlikely to contain much connected prose, while very long documents are likely to skew the corpus unnaturally.
Below an example from the Chintang corpus is given (in its native format, Toolbox).
If you do have the relevant programs installed on your computer, you can also try to create more complex versions, containing more text and formatting, of the different document types yourself and then investigate them.
For example, if a corpus-based analysis contains the length of a phrase as an independent variable, and we introduce the pronominality of that phrase as a second independent variable, these two variables might correlate significantly, since full lexical phrases are by necessity longer than single pronouns.
Tags are often somewhere 'in the background' , so if you are using an interface to query your corpus, you may not see the tags, although they will constrain your results.
This type can be seen as the prototype of the early borrowings with which the word-formation process originated.
First, it is high time we started collecting richer metadata, notably in terms of SL/TL, source and target texts, translator, translation task, and editorial intervention.
Underneath this waveform are two annotation tiers.
Go to www.english-corpora.org/ and select a corpus from the list of corpora on the page.
If we have a paper version of that book, finding these passages will be a long and tedious task, which will require going through the entire text.
If I were willing to speculate, I would consider the possibility that the rejection of corpora and corpus-linguistic methods in (some schools of) grammatical theorizing are based mostly on a desire to avoid having to deal with actual data, which are messy, incomplete and often frustrating, and that the arguments against the use of such data are, essentially, post-hoc rationalizations.
We have to be comfortable with the application of modern toolkits on corpus as such devices help us execute many useful tasks on a corpus.
Further scientific goals of an ATC corpus are applied ones, for example, the development of ATC-specific speech recognition systems (cf.
In all cases, it is necessary to study the rights of use indicated by the respective sites before starting to compile the corpus.
The first answer is that the theories of tokenization and word classes are (usually) explicitly described in the corpus manual itself or in a guide as to how to apply the tag set.
They overlap to greater or lesser degrees but share an essentially identical remit: to make interpretation of large collections of digital text tractable.
There are many applications of the principles and methods of bootstrapping that need to be further explored by corpus researchers.
Their study convincingly illustrates the need to adopt multifactorial research designs in corpus-based translation studies, as these make it possible to go beyond the monofactorial designs where, typically, only the "translation status" variable is considered (translated vs. non-translated).
Similarly, identification of lexemes, although desirable, involves semantic tagging and semantic disambiguation, which again introduces a certain percentage of errors (even higher than part-of-speech, or POS, tagging) and, moreover, cannot be done fully automatically.
If you need to convert webtext, i.e., from html to text, follow the steps on this website: www.computerhope.com/issues/ch001877.htm#text.
For instance, there are concordancing programs that can be used to identify and retrieve various grammatical constructions in a corpus, such as particular words or phrases.
But writing new scripts requires programming skills that are probably beyond the capabilities of the average corpus linguist.
Not only does the corpus contain letters from the sixteenth to eighteenth century, it also covers four major English regions, as well as giving information on the social rank of the letter writers and how they relate to their addressees.
To study press reportage, for instance, it is only necessary to take from a given corpus all samples of press reportage, and to study within this sub-corpus whatever one wishes to focus on.
For example, the British National Corpus (BNC) has annotation that shows the corpus compilers considered of course, for example, for instance, according to, irrespective of, etc.
Note that this description does not necessarily exclude bilingual speakers from the corpus.
While ready-made corpus tools such as WordSmith Tools or AntConc might assume for the user that the corpus parts to be used are the n (a user-defined number) equally-sized parts a corpus can be divided into or the separate files of the corpus, this may actually not be what is required for a certain study if, for instance, sub-divisions in files are to be considered as well (as might be useful for some files in the BNC) or when groupings of files into (sub-)registers are what is of interest.
However, with a small corpus, there is probably a lot less of this "junk" to throw out.
In the second case study, these same concepts are applied in the development of a more advanced program that can replicate and, in some ways, improve on the tools and functions found in ready-built corpus tools.
As pointed out above, the value for the sample variance does not, in itself, tell us very much.
To sum up, Open Corpus Linguistics can be a challenging endeavor, but given the "replication crisis", it is a necessary one.
Many corpora nowadays still do not adequately enable corpus users to set up queries that would exclude items appearing in names when needed to improve precision of the searches.
The conclusions made with these methods are therefore valid for the corpus only.
But with a hypothesis stated in terms of proportions, matters are different: even if the majority or even all of the cases in our data contradict it, this does not preclude the possibility that our hypothesis is true -our data will always just constitute a sample, and there is no telling whether this sample corresponds to the totality of cases from which it was drawn.
Hence there are obvious points of contact for cognitive-stylistic and corpus-linguistic approaches.
While several international initiatives have attempted to standardise metadata formats (see Broeder and van Uytvanck 2014 for an overview), its divergent use across existing spoken corpora is pronounced.
Obviously, the more completely we can extract our object of research from the corpus, the better.
The three occurrences of that's are counted as three tokens, but as one type.
Secondly, corpus linguists need to be clear when marking this distinction.
While this discussion has assumed that appropriate tagsets and tagging models exist for the language or variety represented in your corpus, in many cases, existing sets of POS categories may not be suitable for the data, or may not exist at all.
Typically, the research question itself (step 1) is refined in the light of categorisation and analysis of concordance results and comparison operations between corpora, and then the stepwise process begins again.
Looking at the results, we can first notice that there are specific tokenisation and tagging issues that result in inappropriate 'compound' forms.
If the corpus is not suitable for the research questions, the corpus should be changed or retagged by the researcher.
Nowadays, many concordance packages, such as SketchEngine and LancsBox, have annotation packages built in, enabling automated annotation of features such as parts-of-speech, parsing and even semantic annotation.
With regard to the former, for instance, corpus linguists have used different association measures to quantify, typically, how much two words are attracted to each other or how much a word is attracted to a grammatical pattern, but critical methodological analysis of the commonly used association measures is relatively rare.
Moreover, potentially conflicting desiderata such as comparability and representativeness make it necessary for scholars to consider carefully the make-up of their corpora and the extent to which results based on a selection of registers can be generalized to the language as a whole.
Meanwhile, publications by Mike Scott, Ken Hyland, and John Swales were first found in the middle time spans; their publications on corpus tools and discourse analysis in ESP or EAP were frequently cited.
The final way to explore the data further, which is to be exemplified here, would be to look at how the significant interaction of the fixed effects, LOGLENGTH:TYPE, plays out in the different sub-registers (averaging over all verbs and particles).
Select the appropriate file type that allows you to import text, generally * .txt and/or * .csv.
Every journal title has its own aims and scope of publication; therefore, the analysis of the cited journal titles identified trends in how corpus linguistics research has been communicated within the research community.
These collocations make perfect sense in view of the search terms used for creating the corpus.
And, just in case you're curious to find a single letter A in the data (as you should be), you can investigate this through the concordance by clicking on it.
Annotate: manual or automatic analysis of the corpus 4.
That the two words have roughly the same frequency in our corpus, while undeniably a fact about their distribution, is not very enlightening.
Call up the search-and-replace function, either from the 'Edit' menu or by pressing 'Ctrl + h', which is the shortcut available in most general text editor s these days, even in the non-Windows world.
The alignment is not complete; howeverwhile the critique in favour of introspection denies the utility of corpus linguistics on similar grounds to those of the anti-positivists, the scientia rationalis approach of the Chomskyans is clearly strongly aligned to a logical form of positivism.
As corpus grammar provides frequency information, it can hardly be ignored that different subcorpora yield very different frequency profiles associated with their communicative functions -above all, in the contrast between speech and writing.
Given especially the predominance of work on English in corpus linguistics, until rather recently many corpora came in the so-called ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) character encoding, an encoding scheme that encodes 2 7 = 128 characters as numbers and that is largely based on the Western alphabet.
Although the equation looks complicated, the idea behind ARF is fairly simple: we notionally divide (this is not done physically but as part of the calculation) the corpus into x parts of the same size (v).
The more a corpus satisfies these four criteria, the more prototypical it would be.
Open your favourite text editor and paste in the contents by pressing 'Ctrl + v' on Windows/Linux, ' + v' on the Mac.
Raw frequencies are easiest to interpret within one corpus, normalized frequencies are most useful when frequencies from differently sized corpora are compared, and logged frequencies are useful because many psycholinguistic manifestations of frequency effects operate on a log scale.
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is the assignment to each word of a single label indicating that word's grammatical category membership.
Stanford Parser, for example, is widely used for the syntactic level of analyses of the corpus.
It is far more important that corpus researchers apply and interpret bootstrapping appropriately, than that they use it a lot.
A corpus that has used this type of data to the best advantage is the Corpus of Early English Correspondence, compiled by Terttu Nevalainen, Helena Raumolin-Brunberg and a team of collaborators (Raumolin-Brunberg and Nevalainen 2007).
Both are cut up into chunks, and these segments are where annotation values are placed.
For the time being, following the ideals of Open Corpus Linguistics might in some cases require entering legal grey zones.
So far, the categorization is fairly intuitive and creates no overlapping tags, that is, a text is never both a short story and a novel.
The main advantage at the time was that ASCII was a universally recognized text format that could be used with any word processing program and the numerous software programs designed to work on corpora, such as taggers and parsers and concordances.
Several special corpora contain only specific types of text, which could also be included in a general corpus.
The linguist Randolph Quirk created what is now known as the Quirk Corpus, a corpus of spoken and written British English collected between 1955 and 1985.
We have emphasized (particularly in Section 1.5) that the usefulness of key items, and the quality of analyses and conclusions based upon them, relies on careful and explicit manipulation of the keyword tools settings as well as interpretation.
Obviously, if the goal of a lexical analysis is to create a dictionary, the examination of a small corpus will not give the lexicographer complete information concerning the range of vocabulary that exists in English and the varying meanings that these vocabulary items will have.
At the other extreme are corpora of speech that attempt to replicate in a transcription as much information as possible about the particular text being transcribed.
Elsness' (1997) long-term, corpus-based study of BrE and AmE shows that the PP increases over time but starts decreasing again from the second half of the eighteenth century, a development led by AmE.
In most cases, identification must be done on raw data, sowhenever possible -it is important to find one or more lexical elements that can be automatically identified by a concordancer.
More recent corpora at first glance appear to take a more principled approach to representativeness or balance.
Corpus-driven studies begin by analyzing a corpus to identify the set of important lexical phrases, and then study further the use of those phrases in discourse contexts to interpret the initial results.
An annotation is reliable if two annotators produce convergent annotations or if the same annotator produces convergent annotations at two different times.
For this reason, languages such as Perl, Python (which can run as a functional language), and R have been commonly used for corpus linguistics applications (e.g.
For instance, in a spoken corpus, who said what is often critical to an analysis: only the markup of utterance boundaries and speaker identities allows us to know this.
The term metadata refers to any additional information about the corpus compilers, the data collection (e.g.
In other words, if an expression does not appear in a corpus, this doesn't mean that this expression is non-existent.
Metadata is a key component of any corpus: users need to know precisely what is in a corpus.
Diachronic/historical corpus linguistics is an important area that aims at answering many of the as yet unanswered questions in language history, including differences in style, vocabulary, grammar, and even pragmatics.
Platforms which do limit posting length, such as Twitter (now X), usually limit the maximum length, confining all of their content into the range of short texts, which is mathematically difficult to work with in quantitative corpus linguistics.
The corpus comprises selected extracts of narratives, 153 in all, for a total of around 150,000 words, taken from the demographically sampled 'casual conversations' section of the BNC, which is balanced by sex, age group, region and social class, and which totals approximately 4.5 million words.
In lemmatization, each orthographic word encountered in a corpus is assigned a lemma, or 'base form', which provides a level of abstraction from any inflection that might appear in the original orthographic word.
In cases where researchers need to compile specialized corpora, the question of representativeness is posed a little differently.
In other words, the fewer words there are in a text, the larger the normalized value is.
The maximum level of variation would be reached if the word occurred only in one part of the corpus.
The use of WordSmith's 'keyness measure' was used to rank results, with the 'top 300' skimmed from each corpus for further analysis.
A related question is the variable realisation of objects as either pronoun or zero, and in 8.4 we have presented such a corpus-based study for Vera' a in some detail.
For example, this type of test can be used in studies seeking to find out whether advanced learners produce significantly more discourse connectives than intermediate learners, or whether speakers produce more fallacious arguments when speaking at political party meetings or at electoral campaigns.
Discrete variables have measurements that cannot be divided, like token counts or word lengths in characters.
Data-type predictors include, for example, L1 (is the speaker a native speaker or a learner of some variety?
A sampling frame is determined by identifying a specific population that one wishes to make generalizations about.
The variables and their possible values, including corpus period, are summarized in (10) below; the following paragraphs discuss each variable in turn.
However, if you call up the concordances for these, you'll soon find out that they represent the initial parts of the negative contractions can't, won't, and shan't, which have been separated from the negation 'clitics' in the tagging process and are being treated as individual tokens.
For a corpus then, it is perfectly normal to have multiple versions reflecting different stages of understanding, as well as for different purposes.
They should keep the speech transcriptions and the written data in ASCII (text) format as it is the standard format used in corpus linguistics.
Corpus searches of words that have similar meanings can show that synonyms can occur in quite different contexts.
Finally, all the corpus studies illustrated in this chapter were carried out on corpora of very diverse shape and size.
Thus, in order to investigate the collocates of fair, you simply type fair in the box next to 'WORD(S)', and then click on 'COL-LOCATES'.
In the simplest case, the texts are combined based on some metadata in which we are interested in our analysis.
This version of the corpus is available online but requires a paid subscription.
Also common in corpus linguistics is generalized linear regression.
Thus, subsets of the corpus comprising the documents with common agreement can be retrieved, and the rest of the documents can be analyzed.
In other words, the proportion of language varieties that speakers encounter varies, requiring a notion of balance based on the incidence of language varieties in the linguistic experience of a typical speaker.
Although the texts are accessible, there are copyright restrictions in both cases, which limits the availability of published texts for corpus-building enterprises severely.
An index analysis collects vital information about each word in the corpus (e.g.
However, even if the texts of the corpus have been selected randomly, the sentences and words are not random.
In this case, the first step for the researcher is to build the corpus on which the analysis will be based.
To check on 'strange items' in the list, you can use a right mouse click on the frequency to display a concordance of the item in a new tab.
Those persons having contributed to a corpus through their language productions have rights that need to be respected.
In terms of reliability, this is a good thing: If we apply the same tagger to the same text several times, it will give us the same result every time.
First, the corpus sizes range from the 1.9-billion-word GloWbE corpus to the 50-millionword Strathy corpus.
This shows that text B (academic text) is more lexically diverse than text A (informal speech).
For data in the public domain, such as published fiction or online newspaper text, it is not necessary to secure consent.
In these days of web search engines and vast quantities of text that is available at our finger tips, the end user would be mildly annoyed if a concordance from a 1-billion-word corpus took more than five seconds to be displayed.
The exact choice of filters is dependent on the intended nature of the corpus and research aims, but size and language filters are amongst the most common.
Lemmatization is one of the types of annotations which can be done automatically, with considerable accuracy (see section 7.4).
Thus, a concordance of a word w is a display of every occurrence of w together with a user-specified context; it is often referred to as KWIC (Key Word In Context) display.
However, in order to estimate the importance of a word in a corpus, frequency is not the only element to take into account.
This means that we cannot introduce you here to a set of fully fledged corpus studies of typological distributions in the way that we did, for example, in Chapter 9.
In a large corpus, you will see many bigrams that occur more than once.
Again, metonymy is a vastly under-researched area in corpus linguistics, so much work remains to be done.
The latter, strangely, are still part of the text representation of the XML version of BNCweb, despite the fact that they can easily be encoded in UTF-8, which is, after all, the assumed default encoding for XML.
The problem is that in a list of keyword results, mixing frequent items with very infrequent items often means mixing generalized phenomena with phenomena that are extremely localized, making an account of the keyword list problematic (see the following subsection for a statistical technique designed to reduce this problem).
In addition to this, if we want to be able to exchange documents efficiently, we also need to develop a basic understanding of how exactly text may be represented on the computer, which is what we'll do next.
Each of the messages in the corpus was coded according to the three linguistic variables to be studied, namely the message's length, the presence of opening and closing elements and its main function.
In cross-linguistic research, it is of paramount importance to know, for instance, whether a given text was translated from Spanish into German or vice versa, because corpus studies have shown that translation direction influences translation choices, and hence the linguistic make-up of translated text (e.g.
A number of other studies make use of further computational methods to undertake semantic annotation and categorisation.
Consequently, fewer female writers were included in the corpus than male writers.
This is probably quite common -not only in corpus linguistics but also in other domains, for example, when it comes to publishing programming scripts.
First, it allows us to trace the corpus evidence we see back to its source.
The home page also includes many helpful resources and videos to guide you in the use of the corpus and use of search terms.
This canonical form of the word is called its lemma.
How do you find the clitic form 's in either corpus?
We can (and must) try to minimize errors in our data and our classification, but we can never get rid of them completely (this is true not only in corpus-linguistics but in any discipline).
The text displayed here just looks like any plain text from a book, article, etc., with only the hit highlighted and formatted as a hyperlink.
The Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) collected samples of spoken language in an academic context.
Thus, computer searches of a corpus can be based on grouping together all the separate inflectional forms of a single word.
Collocation graphs and networks build on the idea of collocation introduced in Section 3.2.
Now that you know about some of the issues that may affect our counting of words in a text/corpus, we can start looking at frequency lists properly.
The term "corpus stylistics" can be used to emphasize an intrinsic explanatory goal of stylistics that is concerned with the meaning of individual texts.
In fact, the definite article the is ranked #1 in the corpus with a frequency of 50,017,617.
This is why literary scholars working in stylistics have started to acknowledge the interest of incorporating quantitative methods from corpus linguistics into the analysis of literary texts, so as to have a more objective starting point for identifying interesting themes and relevant excerpts, which should be the subject of a book's qualitative analysis.
However, if one is creating a historical corpus and thus working with texts from earlier periods of English, converting a text into an electronic format can be a formidable task and, in addition, raise methodological concerns that the corpus linguist working with modern texts does not need to consider.
Corpus studies have also uncovered ongoing processes of lexical simplification, as well as morphological regularization and productivity, also showing that divergences from ENL are directional, not random.
In corpus linguistics, it is also often used to measure the strength of association between phonemes or between a word and a construction it can occur in.
An example of this could be the use of genre tropes to create connection through allusions to other texts or even direct references to previous works that add to the narrative being conveyed, for instance a character coming across a different text within the story and having it influence the narrative.
Our aim in carrying out the case study was not to come up with the conclusion that all grammar textbooks should include corpus-based information on all grammar points.
However, if we plan to generalize our results to that variety as a whole, the corpus must be representative of that variety.
Second, if you know the name of a function or construct and just need some information about it, type a question mark directly followed by the name of the function at the R prompt to access the help file for this function (e.g., ?help ¶, ?sqrt ¶, ?
We recognize the relevance of other descriptive and theoretical agendas but feel that focusing on a single approach provides students with more extended experience interpreting their corpus results and motivating the significance of their findings.
The differences between how literary genres are categorized largely reflect the different viewpoints and goals between the fields, with corpus linguistic categorizations aiming to focus on the different communicative purposes of texts, whereas the descriptions of genres by literature scholars are based more on content and stylistic concerns.
Again, corpus linguistics is a uniquely useful tool to investigate this.
That is, if we did a difference type of test (e.g., like ANOVA), there would not be a significant difference between teacher and student presentations in terms of the use of "I mean".
What corpus linguistics has contributed, in essence, is making the identification of those most common lexical items much easier and more data-informed than would have been possible without such a tool.
The first part of the corpus includes French learners who have been exposed to the language within the context of schooling.
In this excerpt from a written fictional text in COCA, any human reader will understand that both instances of her refer back to 'the woman' .
Finally, words can be annotated into semantic categories, for example, the word tennis can be annotated as a part of the sports category, later making it easier to quickly go through the content of a corpus, and to disambiguate polysemic words in context.
The occurrence of v. demonstrates that parts of the general subcorpus contain references to legal matters, where the type is one of the two possible abbreviations for versus (the other being vs.).
In some sense at least, this book is an introduction to corpus linguistics.
However, as pointed out above, many (if not most) hypotheses in corpus linguistics do not take the form of universal statements ("All X's are Y", "Z's always do Y", etc.
Finally, there are scripting languages like Perl, Python and R, with a learning curve that is not forbiddingly steep, that can be used to write programs capable of searching text corpora (ranging from very simple two-liners to very complex solutions).
Corpus-based studies have therefore shown that dialect variation is far more common than had previously been assumed.
In order to improve the reliability of annotations made by humans and to help define clear categories, a commonly used method is to have the same annotation made by two different annotators.
You may now be tempted to investigate further why you can find these American spelling variants in the corpus, and of course the easiest option for this is to click on the link for 'colour' in the frequency breakdown to get to the concordance for the results, and then checking the meta-information for each result.
A TAG comes from a closed and cross-linguistically fixed list of category choices and indicates the type of expression being used for the relevant instantiation of a particular functional category.
In the present context of linguistics and language technology, we have clear ideas about the application of corpus in various domains (Fig.
From both perspectives the underlying assumption is that repeated occurrences of sequences of words reflect their functional relevance in a specific text or a register more generally.
Annotated corpora, however, make it possible to look for elements in the corpus related to syntactic or semantic annotations, for example.
This means that the number of the notional parts, and their length (v in equation (2.20)), depend on the frequency of the word in the corpus.
The chapter finishes with a critical assessment and discussion of future developments in corpus linguistics programming.
In the detailed sampling process, it is decided exactly what texts or text chunks to include.
Given the wealth of speech that exists, as well as the logistical difficulties involved in recording and transcribing it, collecting data for the spoken part of a corpus is much more labor-intensive than collecting written samples.
In contrast, the MICASE Corpus is a more specialized corpus that contains various types of spoken English used in academic contexts (e.g.
In these cases, changes are natural and inevitable and, if they are carefully made, the integrity of the corpus will not be compromised.
Transfer the type that only exists in one list into that row, making sure that the rank is also moved to the appropriate place for the list it occurs in, and setting the rank and frequency in the list where the type's missing to 0.
While writing this book, they used Longman Spoken and Written English Corpus.
A prototypical example of this would be a Twitter corpus that has been collected over a number of months or years.
Diversity is a useful safeguard for a monitor corpus against skewed representation.
For such rank measures, a collocation x y is explored by -computing all AMs for collocations with x, ranking them, and noting the rank for x y; -computing all AMs for collocations with y, ranking them, and noting the rank for x y; -comparing the difference in ranks.
While Type 1 and Type 2 are normally dynamic corpora (and in principle often monitor corpora [cf.
One way to understand linguistic analysis and language is through corpus linguistics, which looks at how language is used in certain contexts and how it can vary from context to context.
International Corpus of English created for comparing the use of English throughout the words is an example of comparable corpora.
Wordforms and in turn the larger structures they form are embedded in text-internal contexts, and the text as a whole relates to situational context.
One is that we're now loading a file with Windows's version of Unicode UCS-2LE and so it is particularly useful to load this file with readLines(file(...)) and the encoding argument set to "UCS-2LE".
Try to access an annotated text and find the respective word for 'woman' .
Some corpus interfaces such as the one at English-Corpora.org allow users to compare the collocates of two words, and the collocates which are more typically used with the compared words are listed in two separate columns in a ranked order, based on a score that takes into account the frequencies and comparative ratios of the two words in the corpus, the frequencies and ratios of different combinations of the words and their collocates, as well as the frequencies of the individual collocating words across the corpus.
For instance, semantic tagging involves annotating a corpus with markup that specifies various features of meaning.
In most cases, the observed data in a sample provides the best possible insight into the population parameters.
Some researchers will include basic metadata in file names (i.e.
Methods of corpus interrogation will be affected by how linguistic organization is conceived.
More bottom-up text-based approaches to text classification, for instance, can reduce the need to rely on more aprioristic classifications.
You can see the actual words from the text in these three bands on the right-hand side.
In diachronic research, scholars may focus on the specific usage of a word or a structure.
ICEweb already caters for some of that information by keeping a little text database that you can open with Excel or OpenOffice Calc.
Assuming that the entire population of texts is inaccessible, our next best option for measuring the degree of bias in our current sample is to collect additional samples of size n from the population and measure the mean rate of nouns in those corpora.
All corpus studies of grammar inevitably make use of the evidence of grammatical usage as observed in corpora in order to arrive at some kind of description of what the corpus attests about some area(s) of grammar.
Thus, generally the concordancer will not be able to 'understand' that you may be looking for a word with a particular meaning if there are homographs or polysemous forms, as in the case of round, which may be classified as an adjective, an adverb, a noun, a verb, or preposition.
The more generic the corpus, the more samples will be needed, whereas for a more specialized corpus, fewer samples are necessary in order to provide representative data.
This involves not only collecting data (speech and writing) but encoding it: transcribing recorded speech, for instance, as well as adding annotation to it, such as markup indicating in a conversation when one person's speech overlaps another speaker's, and in writing where such features as paragraph boundaries occur in written texts.
Imagine, for example, that you have a (untagged) corpus from which you want to retrieve all mentions of former and current Presidents of the United States.
Although the focus in this chapter and the handbook is on tools and methods for English corpus linguistics, I highlight issues of support for other languages and corpora and tools that support multiple languages where they are relevant.
Digital electronic technology has been a boon the corpus linguistics community, but in linguistics, as in life, it's possible to have too much of a good thing.
The crawling for the WordPress and Blogger sub-corpus of the BBC took place without relying on commercial search engines.
The main distinguishing characteristic of corpus-driven studies of phraseological patterns is that they do not begin with a pre-selected list of theoretically interesting words or phrases.
Firstly, a brief outline of what corpus linguistics is will be given.
Linguistic variables involving the relative frequency of some kind of phenomenon in a corpus are also scalar variables.
However, when one uses a corpus to produce tools, systems, and resources and commercialize these, one has to face copyright problems.
Large reference corpora such as the British National Corpus are tagged following the TEI conventions.
Moreover, this is one area where, despite their merits, current big data projects may (for now) be exacerbating the problem by their tendency to go where the data is and harvest text materials indiscriminately.
The relative frequency needs to be normalized to the appropriate basis that is similar in size to the corpus or its parts (subcorpora or texts) that we are interested in.
The relative frequency can therefore be considered as the mean frequency ('mean' is a statistical term for a type of average; see Section 1.3)that is, the mean of the frequencies of the word in hypothetical samples of x tokens from the corpus, where x is the basis for normalization (in this case one million).
A logistic regression analysis establishes that all of the explanatory factors have an effect in the direction that synchronic studies of dative variability have found.
In summary, DP is clearly more effective than D at discriminating between uniform versus skewed distributions in a corpus, especially when it is computed based on a large number of corpus-parts.
Here, a corpus, especially a small one, can be specific to one genre or even one person.
The most important predictors are the speaker's age, polarity, type of determination and proximity.
The approach taken by the Early English Books Online (EEBO) Text Creation Partnership (TCP) is to have an original book manually keyboarded by two different individuals.
Corpora containing syntactic annotation for constituent or dependency structure are called treebanks since syntactic structure is commonly visualised in the form of trees in models of syntax.
It is important to remember that even if a result is significantly unlikely to be obtained by chance, it is still possible to be randomly obtained, and that statistical significance in a model does not directly translate to real-world importance.
In order to do so, we could simply switch the 'Type of ordering' option to 'ascending' and then see which rare, or perhaps exotic, nouns we may find.
This, in turn, also provides evidence of increasing linguistic (i.e., lexical) representativeness of the corpora upon which the lists are based.
In this way, they make it possible to look for such phenomena automatically, without having to listen to all the audio files in the corpus again.
To begin investigating how pseudo-titles and corresponding appositives were used in the regional varieties of ICE being studied, a cross tabulation of the variables "country" and "type" was generated.
But, as shown in the case study carried out in this chapter, it should be feasible to draw up a list of core corpus findings worth including in all types of grammar books.
For instance, while the beginning (Introduction) of a research article may be very similar to its end (Conclusion) in that both discuss the background and aims of the article, the 'middle parts' that describe the actual research are normally very different, and therefore arbitrarily picking either text from the beginning/end or the middle will potentially provide a very skewed picture of the language of research articles.
In this paper, we revisit Rissanen's ideas in order to identify some of the present-day pitfalls in historical corpus linguistics.
For example, in a sentence such as The boy is seen by the ghost, even though the boy is still in the subject position of the sentence, it is the ghost who is doing the seeing in this type of sentence.
Codeswitching is overall rare in our corpus, but its relative frequency is considerably higher in Montreal, as can be expected given the prevalence of bilingual speakers in the city.
Unfortunately, when working with most corpora, and in most concordance programs so far, the option for handling data involving a measure of the syntactic units they occur in is still absent, something we just saw in the Exercise 80.
However, the 'Methods' and 'Results' sections of many corpus-linguistic papers share some important commonalities that we believe can be usefully summarized for less experienced writers and/or beginning corpus researchers.
Given the fact that the Europarl corpus was mainly compiled to serve as training material for machine translation systems, the difference in status between the original and translated languages is of little importance.
A researcher should then balance the efforts and rewards of making changes throughout an entire corpus; keeping some glosses underspecified, as described above, is a relevant technique here.
The second was to avoid a prior division of our corpus into registers.
In general, we should also be aware of the fact that distributing a corpus implicitly amounts to disseminating the ideas contained inside its texts.
Currently, some corpora such as the Google Books corpus (see Chapter 5) and the FrenchWeb 2012 corpus (available on Sketch Engine), collected from the Internet, contain several billion words.
This result is supported by several other analyses of the WARD corpus (e.g.
A typical entry will be preceded by general commentary by Jespersen, with perhaps a few invented sentences included for purposes of illustration, followed by often lengthy lists of examples from his corpus to provide a fuller illustration of the grammatical point being discussed.
The data sample was analyzed with a binary (continued) logistic regression (Chap.
In terms of historical variation, I have suggested at some length in other studies that perhaps the only historical corpus of English that is currently available, which can account for a full range of lexical, morphological, phraseological, syntactic, and semantic variation over the past 200 years (e.g.
For this type of case, the use of a syntactically annotated corpus becomes compulsory.
It is important to note that the chapters on mixed effects regression modeling and generalized additive mixed models in particular are primarily meant for readers to get a grasp of what these techniques are (more and more corpus linguistic papers rely on such methods and it is important for corpus linguists to understand the current literature).
This means that when we decide to use an annotation system or devise one ourselves, we need to make sure that the work is worthwhile, that is, the information we require cannot be extracted in some other way using data that is readily available, such as smarter ways of querying.
We'll discuss options of how to actually mark (up) and distinguish larger units of text in Chapter 11, when we talk about annotation.
The FINREP corpus is a corpus of corporate financial reports, i.e.
It could also be a (crossed) grouping factor completely unrelated to the lemmas, for example encoding some semantic property of the whole sentence containing the construction.
It is for this reason that it is difficult to maintain a perfect balance between the different parts of these corpora, whose representativeness cannot be fully guaranteed.
It should therefore be clear that a specific piece of corpus software cannot always be pigeonholed into one of these three categories.
Corpus linguists' most-cited publications which served as the foundations of corpus linguistics were constantly referenced.
Make sure to provide examples from the corpus to support your analysis of their meanings.
In order to avoid this problem, software should be used for retrieving text from these files and eliminating unnecessary markings (HTML tags).
There is, however, more to explore before LLMs can be fully integrated into corpus linguistic research.
For example, Sketch Engine provides the option to search by lemma or by grammatical category.
The comparable portion of the corpus contains articles from financial newspapers of the early 1990s, in six languages: German, English, Spanish, French, Italian and Dutch.
The idea behind seeing such words types as key is of course based on the notion that non-shared items are always key for a particular corpus, which may not necessarily be the case, even though they do help us narrow down the options for identifying true keywords without the use of statistics.
CIA studies raised the issue of the norm (native vs. non-native; novice vs. expert) and pointed to the benefit of relying on an explicit corpus-based norm rather than the implicit and intuitive norm that underlies many SLA studies.
To get samples of roughly equal size for expository clarity, let us select every sixth case of the of -possessive, giving us 25 cases (note that in a real study, there would be no good reason to create such roughly equal sample sizes -we would simply use all the data we have).
For example, let us imagine that we have collected information concerning the nominal variable mother tongue from the speakers in a corpus, and that we have 36 French-speaking people and 40 German speakers.
It is therefore best to test whatever capabilities your browser has in this respect and download a sample page, which you can then compare with the original.
Since we are most likely to deal with nominal variables in corpus linguistics, we will discuss in detail an example where both variables are nominal.
Importantly, the degree to which the engagement of social scientists with corpus linguistic research will occur varies, once more, according to epistemology.
Bringing an empirical dimension to the study of academic writing allows us not only to support intuitions, strengthen interpretations, and generally to talk about academic genres with greater confidence, but it contrasts markedly with impressionistic methods of text analysis which tend to produce partial and prescriptive findings, and with observation methods such as keystroke recording, which seek to document what writers do when they write.
Some browsers will remove the HTML and only leave plain-text content, while others may retain some bits of HTML, such as, for example, email addresses contained in mailto links (i.e.
In order to do this, it will be necessary to develop tools that will enable us to identify universal features of translation, that is features which typically occur in translated text rather than original utterances and which are not the result of interference from specific linguistic systems.
Even the same metaphors are used: Such similarities are of course not surprising, given that both Digital Humanities and corpus linguistics deal with textual data.
In this section, we are discussing a few areas that we feel should be on corpus linguists' radar; they involve.
Grammatical markup is inserted when a corpus is tagged or parsed.
This is why they represent essential tools for grasping the quantitative properties of a corpus.
He illustrates this problem in an extreme way, by picking the case of an aphasic speaker recorded in a corpus.
Since we are using already existing corpora in AntConc, there is no need to upload any texts from your own corpus, but as the tutorial says, you are more than welcome to do that as well for other projects (including the related projects described below).
The interpretation of the Phi/Cramér V should differ in a corpus based syntax study, an experimental situation, or the evaluation of a sociolinguistic survey.
Using a reduced tagset of nine major word categories and fourteen subcategories from Claws4, the analysts compared a corpus of argumentative essays by advanced French-speaking learners of English with a corpus of similar writing by native English writers.
This concordancer is compatible with the various current operating systems (Linux, MacOS or Windows).
As before, we are defining what counts as a hapax legomenon not with reference to the individual subsamples of male and female speech, but with respect to the combined sample.
Of course the entire raison d'e ˆtre of keywording, a vital tool in the corpus linguistic kit, is to ascertain and quantify the relative presence in and absence from a target corpus of lexical items -that is what "keyness" means -usually as a first step in investigating what that relative presence/absence may infer.
But in striving for breadth of coverage, some compromises had to be made in each corpus.
In addition to these aspects, the corpus needs to be in electronic form since it will be almost impossible to cope with such vast data without the help of technology.
A clear case of a transitive ment-type would be punishment; a clear case of an intransitive type is settlement.
Letters, for instance, have several advantages as a source of historical text material.
Among those analyses are: KWIC (keyword in context), n-grams, collocates in a particular text, and word lists.
However, there are cases where it may be more useful to record them in the form of annotations in (a copy of) the original corpus instead, i.e., analogously to automatically added annotations.
Therefore, geographic region becomes a relevant trait for the sampling frame of a spoken French corpus.
For corpus linguists, it is of course important to know that vectors can also contain character strings -the only difference to numbers is that the character strings have to be put either between double or single quotes.
Potentially ordinal data are actually frequently treated like nominal data in corpus linguistics (cf.
We will present the issues of this chapter from a practical perspective, assuming that we are the compilers of a corpus.
Specifically, a high token frequency of an affix may be due to the fact that it is used in a small number of very frequent words, or in a large number of very infrequent words (or something in between).
I used the 2012 version of the corpus, so the result differs very slightly from theirs.
However, for the period when it was created (early 1960s), it was a huge undertaking because of the challenges of computerizing a corpus in an era when mainframe computers were the only computational devices available.
We search them for the linguistic variable of our interest, such as swearwords, and we observe that the male corpus includes an average of 16 swearwords and the female corpus 14.
This work was based on an analysis of the Brown Corpus, which was a carefully selected compilation of approximately one million American English words from various sources.
However, the researcher should also be ready for changes during the course of data collection since the process of text compilation may not be as smooth as expected.
In the context of corpus linguistics, the most obvious role for the Fisher exact test is to measure dependencies between collocations, or in the case of Stefanowitsch and Gries, dependencies between words and constructions.
Finally, by default, a general corpus includes examples of the variety considered as a language standard, or one of its main varieties.
Interestingly enough, though, AntConc does appear to have a secondary sort order based on the frequency because otherwise uppercase A would have to appear before lowercase a, and the latter is only ranked higher because it has a frequency of 161 as opposed to a single token of the former.
To do this, in the spoken corpus InterFra, Forsberg Lundell et al.
The paper then narrows in focus to look at a group of related areas in the social sciences that might have much to offer corpus linguistics.
As I mentioned above, there exists recurring confusion regarding the distinction between annotation and markup.
Then we fit a first model that, as above, contains all fixed effects -LOGLENGTH, TYPE, and their interaction LOGLENGTH:TYPE -as well as varying intercepts for each level of corpus sampling -(1|LEVEL1), (1|LEVEL2), (1|LEVEL3) -and for each verb (1|VERB) and each particle (1|PARTICLE).
Let us take this broad range as characterizing a linguistic corpus for practical purposes.
In the TED Talks corpus, the only variations concern the numerous target languages.
Finally, for handwritten data, there is no solution other than to manually type it on the computer.
The problem we have just mentioned involves a key methodological point for corpus studies, which is the representativeness of data.
Sometimes this is not possible, as in the case of the problem-solution corpus described above.
For text analysis and similar contexts, the use of LL scores leads to considerably improved statistical results.
In fact, nearly all corpus-linguistic tasks in my own research are done with (somewhat adjusted) scripts or small snippets of code from this book.
One might have expected corpus linguistics to spearhead this development because, following the above logic, corpus linguistics is inherently quantitative.
In other words, three variables are interacting: "type" (pseudo-title or appositive), "form" (simple noun phrase, genitive noun phrase, noun phrase with post-modification), and "length" (1-4 words or 5 words or more).
These main POS categories identify the word as you type it into the search box.
Gries and Wulff (2013) examined data obtained from the British sub-section of the International Corpus of English and the Chinese and German subsections of the International Corpus of Learner English in order to determine what factors govern learners' choice of either the s-genitive (as in the squirrel's nest) or the of -genitive (the nest of the squirrel), and how learners' choices align with those of native speakers.
We are not deontologically justified in making statements about the relevance of a phenomenon observed to occur in one discourse type unless, where it is possible, we compare how the phenomenon behaves elsewhere.
For example, the type/token ratio in the Sciences Humaines written corpus that contains around 260,000 word occurrences is 0.06, but it drops to 0.007 for the 2012 installment of the Le Monde corpus, which has over 26 million word occurrences.
Due to this fact, it is suggested that using electronic texts in a corpus may facilitate the researcher's duty.
Compare with the results for Max in the same corpus.
Questions 1) Using the interface provided on the website of the Corpus français de l'université de Leipzig, what is the frequency order in this corpus of the words maison, chalet, immeuble, bungalow.
The type/token ratio can only be used for comparing texts of similar length.
And again, the same sampling considerations of general corpora apply for special corpora: we sample either to achieve proportional equivalence or in order to reflect the population as closely as possible.
We will discuss this issue in more detail in Chapter 6, which is devoted to presenting the basic principles of corpus creation.
Corpus linguistics, however, has become an indispensable methodology throughout the field of linguistics and its neighboring disciplines.
Frequently, perhaps even typically, corpus linguistic research questions will be more complex, and we will be confronted with designs where both the dependent and the independent variable will have (or be treated as having) more than two values.
However, with regard to diachronic change, the analysis shows that inanimate recipients, as in The herbs gave the soup a nice flavor, have become more acceptable in the ditransitive construction in the twentieth century.
The fact that dictionaries disagree as to whether these are inanimate shows that this is not a straightforward question that calls for a decision before the nouns in a given corpus could be categorized reliably.
A large yet less varied corpus cannot be used for the generalization of a language.
Here items are classified according to a particular scheme, and an arithmetical count is made on the number of items that belong to each class in the scheme within a corpus.
To date, most concordancing research has been carried out on corpora of plain text.
The n-gram technique (also called clusters or lexical bundles) counts and lists repeated sequences of consecutive words in order to show fixed patterns within a corpus.
There are, after all, only a handful of texts in LOB and BROWN that mention either of the two words at all (three in each corpus).
But the same normalized rate of occurrence value also applies to a text of 1,000 words which contains 200 first person pronouns.
We can, in other words, see that if a particular word, phrase or usage is common in a corpus of a particular writer's work, then it might be said to be a consistent preference which reveals something of that individual's routine expression of self: of a relatively unreflective performance of identity.
Since mainstream corpus linguistics focuses on English and other Western European languages, the Latinbased script used in these languages is most common, and relevant corpus software and query mechanisms are based on it.
As already discussed in Chapter 2, this may sometimes be the only feasible option, either because automatic retrieval is difficult (as in the case of searching for ditransitives in an untagged corpus), or because an automatic retrieval is impossible (e.g., because the phenomenon we are interested in does not have any consistent formal properties, a point we will return to presently).
From a written perspective, one may be interested in contexts such as news writing, text messaging or academic writing.
For this reason, extrapolating a frequency, obtained on the basis of a small corpus, to a much larger scale does not offer a correct representation of what was actually observed.
These need to be collected in the form of audio files which are later transcribed to become analyzable with corpus searching tools.
If 95% of the corpus is made up of Parisian speakers aged between 20 and 30 years, such a corpus will not be a representative sample of the population, even if this means including the other speakers among the remaining 5%.
Among other things, we need to select a suitable corpus, an effective analytical technique and an appropriate interpretation of the results.
For instance, for the 90 texts labeled S1A-001 to S1A-090, the letter S indicates that each 2,000-word sample represents spoken English; the numerals 001-090 that it was a private conversation (either a spontaneous conversation or a telephone call); and the uppercase A that it was a dialogue.
However, this argument ignores the fact that, before any annotation is finished, it repeatedly, and often for very long periods of time, needs to be read and edited by humans, so that readability does indeed represent an issue in annotation.
For instance, instead of studying individual classified advertisements, we might consider the entire classified advertisements section a single text for the purposes of our analysis.
City subcorpora were then created for the 206 cities whose residents contributed at least 30,000 words of text.
Some kinds of research questions are easy to explore with a basic corpus.
That means that each observation is a text in which we look for the particular variable that we hope to see variation in (i.e., the dependent variable).
This example is somewhat unusual in that the authors do not collect the data themselves, but instead use a selection of data from an existing corpus.
List 5 IVs and 5 DVs for each variable type.
Their frequency in that text is also shown.
Here's the text again: You are interested in finding out whether undergraduate students majoring in natural sciences use fewer "hedges" than students in the humanities or in the social sciences.
Finally, the shaping of any specific corpus-building project will ultimately depend on its purposes.
Many -if not even most -of the texts available through such archives are free of copyright or available under academic licences, but, as pointed out in Section 3.1.4, before you publish anything based on such a text, it's usually advisable to inform yourself about any potential issues, such as how to acknowledge the source of your materials or whether there are any restrictions concerning re-distribution, etc.
In the case of corpora containing texts as well as their translation, certain tools called aligners make it possible to align the content of the corpus sentence by sentence.
This text size doesn't increase dramatically, even if we add other types of enriching information -generally referred to as annotations (see Chapter 11) -to our files, provided that these annotations are also stored in plain-text form, and aren't excessive.
The motivation is to be able to contextualise the information in the corpus within the overall world of social media.
In the case of a special corpus, we like to include text samples produced by non-native users as the aim of this corpus is to highlight linguistic peculiarities that are typical to non-native users.
We can create two basic forms of n-grams/clusters in AntConc, one where we produce lists of sequences of all words in the text indiscriminately, which takes the longest, and another where we create clusters around a given search term.
Click in the relative frequency cell for about in the general corpus.
These probabilistic parsers have become increasingly common in corpus and computational linguistics, and generally work quite well for annotating arbitrary corpus texts in many languages.
Likewise, the gender of participants in a corpus, or their geographical origin, are also variables.
In potentially all societies there are text varieties that are received by a large number of people but are produced by only a fraction of the societies' members.
As you can see, we can use regular expressions inside the values for the attributes, and we can use the asterisk, question mark and plus outside the token to indicate that the query should match "zero or more", "zero or one" and "one or 4 Data retrieval and annotation more" tokens with the specified properties.
To be able to access information about the speaker attribute, we need to use an attribute-value pair with an equals sign, similar to the way we define attributes in XML, but without the quotation marks around the value.
One response to digital electronic text and data overload is to use only corpora of tractable size or, equivalently, subsets of large corpora, but simply ignoring available information is not scientifically respectable.
Judgment, or purposive, or expert choice sampling, a second type of sampling, was used to create the Brown Corpus.
The authors examine a set of case studies, highlighting issues like part-of-speech annotation, miscategorization challenges, and problems related to metadata and digitized texts in historical databases, such as the 10.5-billion-word Eighteenth Century Collections Online, a database which was originally not compiled for linguistic purposes.
Quantitative frequencies and statistical significance of the differences found were computed to check whether there was a match in the proportional patterns of different qualities for each feature -which was interpreted as a sign of a universal tendency.
For example, decisive advances have been made in the corpus-based description of the grammatical features of spoken language (e.g.
For instance, the Lampeter Corpus of Early Modern English Tracts, which is c. 1.1 million words in length, consists of complete texts ranging in length from 3,000 to 20,000 words.
Although always important, this issue is especially important for corpus-based studies, which generally seek to produce more generalizable results than many other approaches and to facilitate comparisons between different corpora.
Let us further assume we have investigated so many randomly drawn subjects and direct objects from a corpus until we had 152 instances of each and stored them in a data frame that conforms to the specifications in Section 4.
This application has been more widely used by corpus linguistics researchers than the previous two applications.
If we only look up the word since in the corpus, we will also find occurrences which do not correspond to the use of this word as a causal adverb, but to its use as a preposition, for example in "I haven't seen Mary since Christmas".
The FoudonReboul corpus is a longitudinal corpus of eight children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), recorded between the ages of 4 and 9 years.
When the probability level is very low (p <.001), we can feel confident that we are not committing a Type 1 error described above, and that our sample group of students differs from other groups who may have taken the test in the past or who might take it in the future (population).
Header elements may for instance be the page title (contained in the <title>…</title> tag, where the forward slash indicates the end of the tag in the closing part), which then appears in the title bar of your browser, or possibly meta-information (<meta>…</meta>), such as the text (content) type or encoding/character set (charset), as well as style (sheet) information/references (<style>…</style> or <link rel="stylesheet" href="./corpus.css" type="text/css" />, in our case) responsible for some of the page formatting.
The z-score test is a measure which adjusts for the general frequencies of the words involved in a potential collocation and shows how much more frequent the collocation of a word with the node word is than one would expect from their general frequencies.
This confirms the importance of the description and analysis of data and application of corpus in diverse spheres.
Exercise 5 is the reverse type of exercise (i.e.
After all, this information represents aspects of the original speech events from which the corpus is derived and is necessary to ensure a reconceptualization of the data that approximates these events as closely as possible.
Linguistic variables capture frequencies of linguistic features of interest in the corpus.
When comparing the information in the manuals, you'll hopefully spot that the composition of the different corpora is roughly modelled on that of the Brown Corpus, with only small variations in categories and numbers of sample texts.
The GRAID annotations alone enable a number of corpus queries on the annotations as presented here, and as they appear in the ELAN files.
The growing demand in corpus linguistics for statistical sophistication and the lack of appropriate resources for beginner and intermediate users of statistics can thus easily lead to frustration.
Finally, we have seen that corpora can be very diverse in nature, depending on whether they are made up once and for all or incremental, general or specialized, annotated or not, monolingual or multilingual, synchronous or diachronic.
This means that the probability of a given word occurring at some point in a text is influenced by the words that have occurred before and thus the words in a corpus are not random.
Instead of looking at the potential relationship between article type and syntactic position, the focus of the investigation would be to see whether one type of article, when in a certain position, occurs more often in one register over another, and versus in another position.
The reason for this error seems to be that CLAWS was unable to identify the remainder of the sentence as being the rest of a complex NP, presumably because it doesn't 'understand' comma-separated lists that well, and thus 'mis-took' the comma as a phrase boundary, in which case the annotation would have made perfect sense.
When describing corpora, we should always include the information about the exact token count.
One of the earliest corpus-driven studies of this type was Salem's (1987) analysis of repeated lexical phrases in a corpus of French government resolutions.
Both types of information are annotated to a text-either attaching them to the elements of a text or interspersing them within a text.
The difference between bi-grams and collocations is the fact that bi-grams are identified based on two words that happen to be next to each other in a corpus while collocations are two words co-occurring more frequently than by chance.
The authors ran analyses on just under 20,000 FTOs from the Switchboard corpus and then ranked the importance of the variables in relation to each other.
Furthermore, concordancers, such as AntConc, generally also allow us to search for XML tags because they simply represent plain searchable text, but may also sometimes provide options to hide them when we don't want to display them.
For instance, a piece of text made with rhetorical devices is different from a text without rhetorics.
Even if material is available on the web, it does not necessarily mean that it is easy to access-at least not in the way texts need to be accessed for corpus work.
In order to distinguish corpus linguistics proper from other observational methods in linguistics, we must first refine this definition of a linguistic corpus; this will be our concern in Section 2.1.
If your specialized corpus also contains subcorpora, then you should ensure the sub-corpora is of fairly equal sizes.
These texts are then reviewed and their POS tags corrected, creating more data for the next round of training and annotation (cf.
On the whole, the picture that has emerged so far is somewhat sobering because trees on both the small and the large data sets never returned an optimal tree, optimal in terms of accuracy, parsimony, and effect interpretations simply because one strong predictor chosen for the first split may overpower everything else, something which can of course very easily happen in Zipfian-distributed corpus-linguistic data.
These data are typically not part of the corpus itself, but are listed in the metadata (see Chapter 6).
So, learning any computer language will be hugely beneficial to a corpus linguist if and when it becomes necessary to learn another computer language later.
The remainder of the chapter explores these considerations in greater detail, focusing on such topics as the factors determining, for instance, how lengthy a corpus should be, what kinds of texts should be included in a corpus, and other issues relevant to the design of linguistic corpora.
When looking at occurrences of a linguistic item or structure in this way, they are referred to as tokens, so 1 651 908 is the token frequency of the possessive.
Studies that employ corpus-linguistic methods to demonstrate the working of a method make selective links to literary critical arguments.
While investigating position '2 Right' with the same restriction, you'll have to ignore many examples where the node verb form may in fact be an auxiliary, followed by a finite verb and then the preposition, as these examples are really only similar to what we just investigated.
Depending on the purpose of the corpus, this agreement should also consider data sharing with third parties.
Incidentally, the same thing also applies to BNCweb, due to the use of CLAWS in the tagging of both corpora.
We also introduced some basic principles regarding sample collection and balancing.
The version of the corpus which is available free of charge online includes 1,300,000 aligned sentences or fragments, amounting to approximately 2 million words per language.
Two studies have made the use of corpus linguistic research to reinforce the capacity and efficiency of discourse analysis.
Now, many computer programs designed to count words will split the input text on spaces and punctuation.
Try this with at least one of the downloaded HTML files and its corresponding text version.
However, it wasn't until 1986 that the SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) standard was in fact ratified by the International Standards Organisation (ISO).
The sub-term (1|LEMMA) encodes that an intercept will be added to the linear term depending on which lemma is observed.
After purchase, Le Monde newspaper corpus (see section 5.2) can be downloaded via corpora distribution sites such as the European Language Resources Association or ELRA, the Linguistic Data Consortium or LDC, or distributed in a CD-Rom format, such as the French SMS corpus collected in Belgium.
Type 9 (o = 25, e = 3.4) is identical to type 8.
As a result, the handbook includes relatively little discussion of topics that have been fully covered in existing textbooks, such as surveys of existing corpora, or methodological discussions of corpus construction and analysis.
It is nonetheless true that a corpus can only show that which it contains, and therefore the absence of evidence that a word or a structure exists in a corpus cannot constitute definitive proof of their absence from the language.
Retrieving all cases of this construction from the syntactically parsed ICE-GB corpus, Hampe and Schönefeld use the Fisher-Yates exact test to identify verbs which are associated with it.
Moreover, although diachronic comparability improves, it may still not be optimal, because genres themselves tend to be moving targets.
For example, s(CorpusTime, Speaker, bs = "fs", m = 1) requests wiggly curves for log odds as a function of CorpusTime for all speakers in the corpus.
However, over the years, researchers have realised that even this type of size and stratification may not be sufficient for performing certain tasks -such as research in lexicography or collocations (see Chapter 10) -efficiently, and hence started devising ways of creating a variety of different types of corpora, representative of both spoken and written language, and of varying sizes, ranging from very small specialised corpora to some that comprise many millions of words.
To use large, digitised archives as data for corpus linguistic research, it is essential to critically think about the ways in which they have been collected and processed, as well as what kinds of software tools are available to search them.
So far so good, but now the two lines that do the magic of creating the vector type.freqs we want: Remember that type.freqs only contains 0s so far; the first line now inserts a 1 into each slot that belongs to a new type in tokens, as you can see in the output.
Click on the bar for spoken discourse (SPOK) and that will give you 100 sample cases when the verb "say" occurs in spoken discourse.
Be aware that there is a relationship between sample and correlation.
Of course, depending on your corpus, you may also find some rather unexpected words that have nothing whatsoever to do with the verb want; for instance, because my test corpus for trying out regexes contains more 'archaic' language, I also found the adjective wanton, as well as some other constructions, this way.
For example, ends of texts tend to include language that summarizes the main point of the text (in sum, to conclude, they lived happily ever after).
To a certain extent, restrictions on copyright may be alleviated through concepts such as 'fair use', as texts in a corpus are typically used for research or teaching purposes only, with no bearing on the market.
The Corpus of Global Web-Based English (1.9 billion words) also contains complete texts of varying length.
For one thing, the more fine-grained an annotation system, the more difficult it will be to achieve high accuracy.
Standard deviation always needs to be considered in relation to the mean (the relative frequency of the word in the corpus overall).
Every summer, a large number of students from different parts of the world come to Lancaster to learn about corpora and statistics during a week of Lancaster summer schools in corpus linguistics.
The top content items from the Swales corpus are research, genre, English, academic, writing, non-native speakers of English, and the concept of discourse community which similarly encompass his key areas of contribution.
Prior to the collection of spontaneous dialogues in the BNC, calculations were made to ensure that the speech to be collected was drawn from a sample of speakers balanced by gender, age, social class, and dialect region.
This is best done inside the style sheet definition, but may also happen inside the XML file itself.
In corpus linguistic studies, lemmas can be particularly useful in making complex searches more tractable, especially when a single word appears in many forms.
In particular they need to be annotated, at least transcribed, and it is the transcription that will eventually resemble our corpus text.
For a literary corpus, for example, works from different authors should be included.
Numeric values are relevant if you have frequencies of a linguistic feature (e.g., the number of personal pronouns in a text).
For instance, while the spoken part of the ICE contains legal cross-examinations and legal presentations, the written part of the corpus contains no written legal English.
The line we just inserted identifies the document as being in XML for any application that's capable of displaying it, at the same time specifying its encoding as UTF-8.
A more common approach is to begin with a single word (or lemma) of interest, called the node, for which a concordance search has been performed; the surrounding text is then scrutinised to establish what elements occur frequently in the vicinity of the node.
Even some mega corpora, such as the one billion-word Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), contain various registers, such as fiction, speech, press reportage, and academic writing.
A historical or diachronic corpus is a collection of texts from different periods.
The reality of contemporary corpus linguistics is that the corpora we rely on, in most cases, are simply too large for manually adding annotation, and the automated annotation of electronic texts has become the primary focus in the development of annotation methods.
Moreover, some authors and publishers will ask for money to use their material: one publisher requested half an American dollar per word for a 2,000-word sample of fiction considered for inclusion in ICE-USA!
IDs pointing from annotations to corresponding speaker metadata), it requires great manual effort to make use of it for automatic corpus searches (see also Chap.
We can explore how frequently particular word combinations (n-grams) occur together in a corpus or how they are distributed across different registers.
In terms of quantitative analyses, we observe how there is much in common between corpus linguistics and the social sciences anyway.
Similar to ASCII files, researchers have been using Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) as this system developed a formalism used for identifying the specific character set used in a given electronic format.
Renouf and Sinclair then point out that the frequency of these items in the collocational framework does not correspond to their frequency in the corpus as a whole, where, for example, man is the most frequent of their twenty words, and lot is only the ninth-most frequent.
To remedy this, MERLIN includes a wide range of error annotations, with a major error-annotation category layer (EA_category, e.g.
Researchers using these corpora are then forced to accept the assumptions and decisions of the corpus creators (or they must try to work around them).
First, it must not be misunderstood to suggest that studying the distribution of linguistic phenomena is an end in itself in corpus linguistics.
Even though researchers can do tagging manually, it is now possible to train computer programs to tag utterances or sentences automatically.
Baayen's idea is quite straightforwardly to use the phenomenon of hapax legomenon as an operationalization of the construct "productive application of a rule" in the hope that the correlation between the two notions (in a large enough corpus) will be substantial enough for this operationalization to make sense.
Again, each corpus processing tool used at the retrieval stage should be listed, described and properly referred to.
Other fields have had long and intense discussions about these things -corpus linguistics, unfortunately, has not.
The latter may also be represented by a stylised button text, e.g.
Reflecting on the process, we can see that the corpus software aided our analysis but much of it had to be done manually.
Also, the variable scale and type determines the types of statistical analyses that can be done.
However, the most frequent equivalent in the translation corpus is increasingly, which is only mentioned in the LA.
The comparison revealed that non-corpus-informed materials fail to include important information on the passive.
In register studies, as we saw in the previous chapters, contextual differences refer to differences in particular aspects of the situational characteristics in the construction and production of a given text.
Corpora with so-called interlinear morphemic glossing which captures the meaning and/or grammatical functions of morpheme tokens in a corpus are sometimes labelled interlinearised corpora.
This type of tool has made the collection of web-based corpora extremely easy.
They allow us to see what words appear (and do not appear) in a text, and give an indication of their prominence if we sort the list in frequency order.
In the simplest case (which we 4.1 Retrieval assumed to hold in the examples discussed in the previous chapter), a corpus will contain plain text in a standard orthography and the software will be able to find passages matching a specific string of characters.
We need to do this because these line breaks, as indeed anything that doesn't really form part of our text, may in fact interfere with the processing of the text later and even create a number of problems that could affect the meaningfulness of at least part of your data for linguistic analyses.
For instance, consider the Microsoft Paraphrase Corpus.
This study is based on BE06, a balanced corpus of contemporary British English, and AmE06, a balanced corpus of contemporary American English.
If it came from a British text, we would not hesitate to assign the latter reading, but since it comes from an American text (the novel Error of Judgment by the American author George Harmon Coxe), we might lean towards erring on the side of caution and annotate 3.1 The scientific hypothesis it as 'road surface'.
As the results are now in random order, if we do want to know which particular category of the corpus (or 'genre') the individual result was found in, we need to check the category details.
Although the majority of the research concentrates on pragmatic features of spoken language, we also include studies that highlight the importance of corpus pragmatics to the written context.
Tools have been developed in order to make data annotation in XML format easier, such as the Nite XML tool, for example.
In this case, XML editing software may be required to simplify the process and check for consistency of the results.
The chapter advocates for more detailed annotation of named entities in large linguistic corpora that are already available.
The fact that the terms bogus and genuine appear as collocates of refugee(s) in the corpus suggests that this occurs quite frequently.
This corpus contains 400,000 words of spoken English from ICE-GB and an additional 400,000 spoken words from the London-Lund Corpus, a corpus that was based on texts recorded between 1960 and 1980.
On the other hand, if it is tagged as an adjective, broken is lemmatised as broken -since the change of category to adjective is deemed to create a new lemma.
From a general standpoint, one could do as I did and simply use fiction in general as the reference, and asking the question of what makes this author stand out amongst a sizeable sample of other authors active during the same period.
For many questions, the raw data retrieved from a corpus will not be sufficient.
The sample variance S 2 = P(1-P), and for a very small P value, it is roughly equivalent to P, namely x in this case.
In the case of monitor corpora, while the new data added at regular intervals may improve their representativeness, they nonetheless pose balancing problems between the different portions of the corpus, an aspect we will discuss in the following section.
Take the TTR: if we interpret it as the probability of encountering a new type as we move through our samples, we are treating it like a nominal variable Type, with the values new and seen before.
The difference might be attributed to other situational variables such as the difference between an exam and an in-class activity or the relationship between participants and the text construction.
Broader domains also expose the study to 'apples and oranges'type critiques wherein the heterogeneity of the sample is such that aggregation of findings across studies is deemed inappropriate.
Another kind of higher-level annotation is syntactic parsing, which aims to provide information about the grammatical structure of sentences in a corpus.
If you don't use the 'Paste Special…' option, which in Calc even triggers the text import wizard, you'll end up with frequency values that the spreadsheet cannot interpret as numbers because they still contain some (hidden) HTML formatting.
However, if we scroll further down the list until we find ranks 112-116, which all have the same token frequency of 20, we find that guess is in fact listed above OJ because it starts with letter g. This is because AntConc already automatically corrects the computer's 'natural' sort order in order to allow us to see types that occur with the same letter together, something that's more natural for human 'consumers' of such frequency lists.
In addition, speakers would be recorded using language in a variety of different contexts, such as conversing over the phone, lecturing in a classroom, giving a sermon, and telling a story (www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/research/santa-barbara-corpus).
For each token, the analysis will produce a predicted value of the dependent variable.
One type selects a subset of the more important data variables and eliminates the remainder from the analysis, using some definition of importance.
The analysis of Trump Speak also contains a discussion of how to use concordancing programs to obtain, for instance, information on the frequency of specific constructions in a corpus as well as relevant examples that can be used in subsequent research conducted on a particular topic.
Dummy coding is a way of encoding a categorical variable as a R. Schäfer distributed around 0.
Another advantage of the quantitative analysis of literary texts is that it provides clues for identifying the author of a text when the latter is unknown or controversial.
LGSWE is more explicit about its methodology, which is based on the annotation of a corpus with the categories used in the book.
To verify the results for any particular type in either subcorpus, you can use the hyperlinks in the columns labelled 'TOKENS 1' and 'TOKENS 2', respectively to have KWIC concordances displayed in the frame in the bottom half.
The translational component of the comparable corpus of narrative texts contains a higher proportion of high-frequency words and its list head covers a greater percentage of text with fewer lemmas than the nontranslational component.
As in all corpus-linguistic studies, research can be conducted with the "top-down" method that takes a linguistic feature or grammatical category as its point of departure; this is the deductive method.
Let's say you want to create a corpus of newspaper editorials.
Moreover, longitudinal designs and developmental questions require tracking participants and collecting metadata such as full names, addresses, and birth dates, which makes the raw data quite the opposite of anonymous.
This is a phenomenon we'll frequently encounter in our analyses from now on, and it requires us to always have an open mind and the willingness to let the data 'drive' our interpretation, rather than trying to force the data to fit the theory, which is something I've frequently observed, for example, when colleagues who were doing literary analysis were not working closely enough to the actual text, but always somehow tried very hard to make the text fit the theory they were using.
However, a closer look into the instances of lifespan informs us that all the 3,700 hits are found in only 83 texts, which suggests the word probably has a very uneven dispersion across the corpus.
The first thing you obviously need to consider is what type of spoken data you may want to analyse.
Phi and Cramér V 'factor out' the size of the sample, and give the 'average' contribution of rows and columns (that is, the categories in the table and their respective observations in the rows and columns) to the final result.
In the first generation that developed alongside machine-readable corpora, software tools running on large mainframe computers simply provided concordance or key-word-in-context (KWIC) displays, and separate tools were created in order to prepare frequency lists, e.g.
Even registers with a great deal of diachronic stability, such as religious writing, are subject to change in this regard.
Although it now exists in digital form, the Quirk Corpus was originally an entirely "print" corpus.
Corpus compilers who are able to collect relevant material in the public domain still need to check the accuracy and adequacy of the material.
Thus, we would have to discard it based on our intuition that it constitutes an error (the LOB creators actually mark it as such, but I have argued at length in Chapter 1 why this would defeat the point of using a corpus in the first place), or we would have to accept it as a counterexample to the generalization that singular subjects take singular verbs (which we are unlikely to want to give up based on a single example).
Many different statistics can be selected to determine the significance of the difference in the frequency of a word that occurs in close proximity to the node word against its frequency in the remainder of the corpus, e.g.
This means you have to make sure that when working with different software or on different machines the text and letters that look the same really are the same in terms of their encoding.
Therefore, essentially, all the cases of collocations identified through the tscore stat that I've just discussed, strictly speaking, represent cases of colligation.
The tenet that lexicon and grammar form an integrated continuum of form-meaning pairing has gained ground to the point of probably forming the majority position in current corpus linguistics.
Indeed, the corpus has such a flexible online interface that it allows the user to dynamically select a working corpus precisely tailored to their specific objectives.
For language archives, one will either have to fill in metadata forms, for instance, the metadata catalogue of PARADISEC (catalog.paradisec.org.au/), or adhere to a standard metadata format, for instance in the DoBeS (tla.mpi.nl/project/dobes/) or the ELAR (soas.
Therefore, all newly created files for a corpus should be directly saved into text format.
If a participant later refuses to have their data distributed, removing them from the corpus may pose many difficulties.
For example, given a rich historical record and a long tradition of high-quality text editions, it is perfectly possible to create a sizeable corpus of Old French, as shown by the FRANTEXT database.
For the word film, the search can focus on the lemma rather than on the word, in order to identify singulars and plurals.
In a purely lexical corpus (i.e.
Metadata is data about data, that is, information about the texts that have been included in the corpussuch as whether they are written or spoken, information about genre or domain, bibliographic information on original publication of a written text, or demographic information about the speakers in a spoken text.
Within the transcripts, it might be useful to include an annotation of the non-standard words used, for example, in verlan, with their equivalent standard so that they can be found in a concordancer.
While frequency appears to suggest some sort of parity in salience, these occurrences had very different distributions throughout the corpus.
Our main purpose here is to explain the basic implementation of corpus annotations and how they add value to a corpus by enhancing its amenability to a wider range of research questions.
The reason why composition is guided by these situational rather than linguistic characteristics is that the latter cannot be known before a corpus has been compiled and investigated: Corpus composition and corpus types you can select for texts based on the situational fact that they involve more than one speaker, but you cannot select texts with a particular proportion of first-and secondperson pronouns.
This word clearly refers to Tony Blair, a former Prime Minister of Great Britain, and will be more prominent in British than in American press reporting (64 times in nine texts versus one time in one text, respectively).
In modern spoken corpora in general, a wealth of paralinguistic information is tagged, such as coughing or door slamming, much of which is of little importance; however, some of these features, such as laughter, are of significance to corpus pragmatics.
So, to begin with, it is necessary to convert the files included in the corpus to text format.
If a corpus samples only certain sections, e.g.
Even the best fully automated annotation still needs to be checked for errors by human editors, although, as we've seen in the many examples of mis-tagging in the BNC and COCA, this is often not done for reasons of time and cost involved, especially the larger the amount of data processed becomes.
The question is how to deal with these words in the keyword procedure.
We will turn to the role of corpus linguistics in sociolinguistics in Chapter 9.
Unfortunately, this corpus is not available for free and must be purchased via the ELRA platform.
For example, if you were to look at "text" as a verb, you would see that this verb has increased from 1990 to 2020 while "fax" has moved in the opposite direction.
Finally, if applicable, the command should specify the type of speaker whose words have to be analyzed.
Several points mentioned in the guidelines are directly relevant to whether or not the Microsoft Paraphrase Corpus (MPC) fits the definition of a corpus.
This is useful, for example, when a classification has been made on a scale of very negative, negative, neutral, positive, and very positive type values, but one may want to combine the results to return the corpus grouped into positive, neutral, and negative.
The multiple annotation schemes of SCOPIC are organised along functional categories.
For a start, AntConc can only read text format files.
This obviously requires careful consideration and also to develop at least some initial hypotheses about what you'll encounter in which type(s) of data, which techniques to apply, etc.
The s-possessive is easy to extract if we use the tagging present in the BROWN corpus: words with the possessive clitic (i.e.
In order to limit processing and memory requirements, we retained no more than 1,000 total occurrences per word and used a random sample for more frequent items.
In addition to these, metadata is also collected about the situational features of texts (cf.
One final comment regarding these data: The use of the above data set is not to imply that a data set like this is typical for corpus-linguistic data in general or for tree-based analyses of such data in particular.
The most obvious area in which the social sciences have shadowed developments in corpus linguistics is corpus markup.
The more types have already occurred, the more types there are to be reused (put simply, speakers will encounter fewer and fewer communicative situations that require a new type), which makes it less and less probable that new types (including new hapaxes) will occur.
With new corpora containing billions of words and allowing complex searches by making use of various search functions and different types of linguistic anno-tation, novice corpus users may find it difficult to question the relevance of their search results adequately and carefully.
Thanks to them, descriptive grammar will continue to have a role in corpus linguistics.
Constructing a useful corpus involves a number of steps that are described below.
For instance, raw video data encoded in one format such as MPEG1 will have to be regularly updated to new encoding schemes.
Considering the names in which royal with a capital initial is tagged as an adjective instead of a proper noun, the types of entities in question is reflected in the tagging, as noted in the BNC2 manual; in the names of institutions or charters, royal is an adjective, in the names of locations it is treated as a proper name.
Corpus linguistics takes real samples that are used to generalise about language, and corpus-based typology helps us to confirm (or confront the idea) that these assumptions are applicable for a more diverse sample.
With better metadata about individual texts and speakers, we will be in a better position to understand the data, not only to correlate metadata to variation, but also to see more precisely how corpora differ in the case of comparison.
Now, some corpora (e.g., COCA) have POS tags attached to each word, and some corpora (e.g., Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English [MICASE], and Michigan Corpus of Undergraduate Student Papers [MICUSP]) do not have that feature in addition to the actual words in a corpus.
The next step is to assign each corpus a set of independent labels.
This is still very much a grey area, with different laws applying across the world, and anyone planning to distribute a web-derived corpus should seek local advice.
The best examples we've seen for this were the meta-textual choices BNCweb allowed us to make for selecting specific parts of the BNC for different analysis purposes, which were all made possible by the fact that the BNC (in its most recent version) is marked up in XML, albeit with somewhat over-elaborate header information, as we'll soon discuss.
Moreover, while the term lemmatisation is derived from the term lemma which in corpus linguistics (but not necessarily in lexicography) is used fairly often as an equivalent of lexeme.
For example, this is the case of the Belgian Valibel database of spoken French (see section 5.3) or the SMS corpus in Switzerland's national languages, collected by the universities of Zurich and Neuchâtel (see section 5.5).
However, to fully describe a word or phrase in a corpus, we need to introduce another concept, namely dispersion.
With a corpus such as the BNC, we know precisely what kinds and types of English are being analyzed.
This represented the first attempt to create a historical corpus conforming to the standards of TEI.
In its recent versions, the WordSmith concordancer also offers a similar function.
Although HTML is a direct descendant of SGML, it only provides a limited set of tags, which, on the one hand, makes it less flexible than XML, but, on the other, also much easier to learn.
Make sure you set the 'Token (Word) Definition' in the 'Global Settings' to include hyphens and apostrophes.
In the sample sentence, in winter is "thematised," and Hoey shows that this phrase when occurring in Theme position collocates in his corpus with the verb be, and with the names of places, again proportionally more frequently than the alternative phrases.
The first chapter of this book started with a similar definition, characterizing corpus linguistics as "as any form of linguistic inquiry based on data derived from [...] a corpus", where corpus was defined as "a large collection of authentic text".
A portion of the corpus, including works from the 18th to the 20th Century, can be downloaded for free from the Ortolang website.
In the end, balancing a corpus is never a perfect task.
Many areas in psycholinguistics and computational linguistics have made interesting discoveries, have developed useful tools, have adopted great methods from neighboring fields, but corpus linguistics is unfortunately not leading the pack and must take care not to lose momentum either in terms of its own evolution or in terms of how it helps to shape linguistics as a whole.
In the same vein, it's also important to understand that once we actually have extracted some relevant data from a corpus, this is rarely ever the 'final product'.
That is why it is also known as part-of-speech (POS) annotation.
For written texts, a complete bibliographical citation for the text was recorded along with the address of the publisher or editorial office from which permission to use the written text could be obtained.
In order to encourage and enable the application of meta-analysis in corpus linguistics, we have also introduced and demonstrated the main procedures involved including how to (1) search for primary studies, (2) develop and implement a coding scheme, (3) aggregate effect sizes using different R packages to obtain estimates of the relationship in question as well as estimates of variance and of different moderator effects.
By contrast, in many ways, software tools in the social sciences that facilitate textual analysis are oriented towards qualitative researchers and focus squarely on providing support for manual text annotation.
In the case of a speech corpus, it is related to the amount of audio data (in MB or GB) or duration of a speech (in hours and minutes).
Nevertheless, there is still a lot of room left for the development of new ways to analyze datasets with a wide range of text lengths, and particularly datasets which contain extremely short texts, which are more common today than ever.
But despite the difficulties of creating a truly balanced corpus, designers of the BNC made concerted efforts to produce a corpus that was balanced for such variables as age and gender, and that was created so that information on these variables could be extracted by various kinds of software programs.
For the moment, simply try to identify the 'head' and 'body' sections of the page and see whether you can possibly also understand which type of meta-information the different parts of the header may relate to.
The solution offered by GAMs is to balance two constraints, one constraint demanding that we want to stay faithful to the data (by minimising the summed of squared errors), and one constraint that demands we keep our model as simple as possible.
For example, the annotation of speech acts requires setting up a list of the acts to be annotated, for example, requesting, promising, asserting, threatening, etc.
This might be due to the different methods used, or to the fact that I excluded business, which is disproportionally fre-9 Morphology quent in male speech and writing in the BNC and would thus reduce the diversity in the male sample substantially.
Where an annotator is at fault, they could correct their annotation decision.
In fact, it can be argued that intuitionbased linguistics developed as a reaction to corpus-based linguistics.
I will turn to this point presently, but before I do so, let us discuss the third of the three consequences of large-scale testing for collocation, the methodological one.
On the 'grammatical word' tier the text is divided into grammatical words which is essentially a step of tokenisation.
Corpus is used to verify any linguistic hypothesis's falsifiability, completeness, simplicity, strength, and objectivity.
The role of this type of formulation largely depends on the context and cannot be automatically inferred from the linguistic form employed.
While perfect solutions may not yet exist, Liimatta offers useful insights to the study of linguistic questions within the context of varying text lengths.
However, we may also sometimes want to look at the least frequent words first, assuming that they can possibly tell us something very specific about the terminology used, for instance in a highly technical text that contains a number of specialised words.
The main goal of this type of recording is to link the characteristics of the speech of the child to her immediate linguistic and extra-linguistic environment.
The maximum value of the coefficient of variation depends on the number of parts in the corpus, and is equal to the square root of the number of parts minus 1 ð ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi no: of corpus parts À 1 p Þ.
In addition, when dealing with diachronic comparisons, we need to assess whether the observed differences in frequencies are related to change in the discourse/language over time or whether these are related to other sources of variation.
In a keyword list comparing WH-Obama with the one-million-word spoken section of the BNC Sampler (a collection of diverse discourse types) the following items all appeared among the top 200 keywords: continue (as in continue our efforts, continue to work on .
Another example of a nominal variable, this time an explanatory one, could be the region of origin of the speakers of a spoken corpus, for example, Paris, Geneva, Brussels, Montreal.
Overall, there are 96 different types, 48 of which occur in both samples (some examples of types that frequent in both samples are relationship (the most frequent word in the fiction sample), championship (the most frequent word in the news sample), friendship, partnership, lordship, ownership and membership.
MOVS and MOVT in Representative Corpus 2).
We will encounter the same problem when we compare the TTR or HTR of particular affixes or other linguistic phenomena, rather than that of a text.
The main locations in this area represented in the corpus are the cities of Newcastle upon Tyne on the north side of the river Tyne and Gatesheadon the south side, but its geographical reach is currently being extended to include speakers from other regions in the North-East such as County Durham, Northumberland, and Sunderland.
In other words, the interpretation of a constructed sentence is subjective in the same way that the interpretation of a sentence found in a corpus is subjective.
In the context of corpus linguistics, their use is somewhat questionable, and the reader should be aware that it is regrettably not unusual to find these tests employed in ways which do not fit well with their assumptions.
In the following sections, we will discuss in depth the different central points of the definition, indicated in bold, in order to better understand the theoretical and methodological anchoring of corpus linguistics.
Another important research area using speech corpora has been automatic speech recognition (ASR), speech-to-text (STT), and text-to-speech (TTS) applications, that is, how can machines be trained to account for the variable productions by human speakers?
Various annotation systems have been developed for these different domains.
But these texts also tend to be long enough for reasonable quantitative corpus-linguistic analysis.
In doing so, this chapter showcases applications of regression techniques in corpus-linguistic research.
For some of the annotations discussed thus far, corpus linguists have developed dedicated comparative perspectives.
This dependency is due to the fact that our ability to analyse and examine complex and extensive multimodal corpora in a systematic and accurate way (particularly when integrating traditional corpus-based methods into the approach), is reliant on the availability of appropriate technology.
For example, it is more likely that a word will occur in 6 out of 10 corpus parts than for that same word to occur in 600 out of 1000 corpus parts.
If the data contain examples that occur just once, or patterns that occur repeatedly only because they are all from the same text, these cases will usually be discarded in the search for general patterns.
In the Helsinki Corpus, text samples range from 2,000 to 10,000 words in length.
Anybody who wants the claims made based on a corpus to be accepted by the research community needs to show in some way that the corpus material is appropriate for the type of research done.
The Swales corpus was compiled at the Michigan ELI and consists of 14 single-authored papers together with the bulk of his three monographs, representing eighteen years of output and comprising 342,000 words.
Even the diachronic ones are, because they've not been designed to be added to later, even if, for example, at some point in time a further Old English epic may somehow be unearthed and could thus theoretically be included in a new edition of the Helsinki Corpus.
In order to compare the two genres in terms of the type-token and hapaxtoken ratios, they need to have the same size.
Working with corpus linguistics therefore implies being in contact with linguistic data in the form of texts, and also in the form of recordings, videos or any other sample containing language.
As a consequence, even though the creators of the Brown Corpus, W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kučera, are now regarded as pioneers and visionaries in the Corpus Linguistics community, in the 1960s their efforts to create a machine-readable corpus of English were not warmly accepted by many members of the linguistics community.
The corpus, which is expanded every year and currently contains over 129,000 tokens, is collected from eight open access sources: Wikinews news reports, biographies, fiction, reddit forum discussions, Wikimedia interviews, wikiHow how-to guides and Wikivoyage travel guides.
In contrast, the inductive approach can be applied to a large data set because it requires no a priori annotation.
In addition, if the corpus is made available to others, they need to know what is in it in order to make an informed decision about whether the design of the corpus is appropriate for answering their specific research questions.
We'll explore plain-text-based file formats, such as HTML and XML, that may contain such markup further in later sections, as well as discussing their use(fulness) for linguistic annotation/analysis.
Annotation refers to adding linguistic information to a corpus.
This measure takes into consideration how many different word types make up a token frequency.
The keywords in the corpus include proper nouns such as Edison, Funès, Fernandel, Gabin and Reynaud and also content words like cinéphile, cinéma and crédits.
Typically, privacy laws require corpus compilers to ask for the formal written authorisation by each speaker to be recorded for the corpus and to allow the transcription, sharing and re-use of his or her data.
The latter will allow corpus analysts to evaluate attestations of particular structures as being elicited, with such and such context, etc., and this may have specific implications for their linguistic analysis as well.
In order to find the difference in proportions, we then have to subtract the expected proportion from the observed proportion for each portion of the corpus.
Since a longer text by definition contains more words, there are also more opportunities for any given linguistic item or feature to appear.
Intuitively, there may be a rough correlation in some cases: newspapers publish more reportage than editorials, people (or at least academics like those that built the corpus) generally read more mystery fiction than science fiction, etc.
If the study makes use of existing corpora, the possibility of investigating a certain question or not, or the manner in which it can be operationalized, depends on the characteristics of the corpus.
Consequently, much of what could potentially be annotated in a written text is likely to be of marginal interest to future users of the corpus.
Here, it is not our intention to argue that the texts included in big-data corpora should be sampled manually; indeed, when the corpus includes samples from tens or even hundreds of thousands of individual texts, it is obviously not feasible to check all the data sources individually.
He found, for instance, that humanities texts are more lexically diverse than technical prose texts (p. 252); that is, that as a humanities text progresses, there is a higher likelihood that new words will be added as the length of the text increases than there will be in a technical prose text.
In addition, I shall briefly comment on the underutilized notion of dispersion, that is, a measure that quantifies how evenly distributed elements are in a corpus, and thus also relates to the notion of corpus homogeneity.
Partington presents a series of case studies that illustrate how corpus methods can shed light on diverse areas like synonymy, cohesion, and idioms; analysis of concordances plays a major role throughout.
The idea is that the less meaningful words are excluded, giving someone more insight into the corpus.
As the alternative representations listed in the previous sentence show, there may be multiple ways of representing the same thing, and you should not only find a consistent way of representing these features, but also document their meaning, so that other potential users of your corpus will be able to understand exactly what they represent.
In summary, in addition to frequency indications, it is important to provide information about lexical dispersion in a corpus, either by simply calculating the percentage of texts in which a word is used, or by reporting a dispersion measurement, such as the deviation of proportions we have just described.
Quantitative analysis -one of the core activities of corpus linguistic research -is not possible as we do not know the total size of the web 'corpus' held on the search engines' servers.
Hence, gathering texts from a wide swath of academic disciplines, Gardner and Davies extracted a "core" academic list from a corpus of over 120 million words.
While word-class annotation is very well established in corpus linguistics, there are other types of annotation as well.
As in all research, there is much in corpus linguistics that is subjective, including the choice of research question and of the procedures and software to employ, not to mention the interpretation of the output data.
The power of software-aided searches depends on two things: first, on the annotation contained in the corpus itself and second, on the pattern-matching capacities of the software used to access them.
Finally, before exiting this conditional expression, we delete the multi-word units from the corpus sentences so that their constituent words are not counted again.
Ideally, one would not just report the results of significance tests, but also all relevant statistics such as effect directions, effects sizes (raw and/or standardized), indices of model/classifier quality and classification/prediction accuracies, as well as the results pertaining to model/classifier diagnostics and validation; also for most 26 Writing up a Corpus-Linguistic Paper 649 advanced analyses, this is the part where the main results should be visualized in a way that facilitates their comprehension even, but also especially, for readers whose statistical knowledge is more limited.
As we have seen, annotation always requires a certain type of interpretation and this may vary slightly from one annotator to another.
This gives standardised metadata results, among other things, in the data appearing on the archive' s website in a structured way.
Consequently, more post-editing has to be done after a corpus has been parsed.
A corpus of spoken French should therefore include a similar proportion of male/female speakers, from different age groups and different regions.
Upon closer inspection, however, it turns out that this type in most instances in both corpora in fact represents a typo, that is, the misspelt form of will, or in the science writing a mis-categorisation of the nominalised form of the verb wilt in two cases.
In the second, we can then construct one or more appropriate search patterns that'll allow us to create concordances that illustrate which word classes co-occur with which type of construction.
For example, in text sample 1, the students state that the analysis will provide a comparison, explore the effectiveness, and discuss alternative solutions -but the analysis itself cannot discuss effectiveness or other solutions.
Blogs offer similar advantages when it comes to boilerplate removal and text dating (see Representative Corpus 2 for more information on the Birmingham Blog Corpus) and are one variety of so-called 'Web 2.0' content, which is being used increasingly in linguistic research.
As we discussed in Chapter 1, a corpus does not simply represent a collection of randomly chosen texts.
There are numerous compression formats, but the most common one is .zip, for which most operating systems not only provide direct support, but also generally have options to create and manage this type of archive from within whichever graphical file manager they offer.
Technical developments have brought along a rich array of corpus-linguistic applications, and corpus compilers have created a good selection of databases for public use.
As corpora become more sophisticated in areas such as their pragmatic tagging, it is predicted that they cannot be ignored as research tools by those researching pragmatics.
An important corollary of being able to control the parameters for creating frequency lists is that, whenever you're reporting any results of frequency analyses The above exercise should have demonstrated quite clearly what kinds of differences to our analyses changes in token definitions might make, but still cannot show us a full picture of all the advantages provided by creating customised frequency lists on the computer.
As we will see in the following chapters, corpus linguistics may be of use in all areas of linguistics, for instance in fundamental (see Chapter 2) or applied (see Chapter 3) linguistics.
A more recent corpus, the Corpus of Web-Based Global English, is 1.9 billion words in length.
On a rainy Lancaster afternoon, I start searching the EEBO corpus.
Sample A is clearly a piece of narrative fiction, mixing narrative description and simulated reported speech, references to characters and situations that are depicted as life-like, as well as featuring a number of at least partly evaluative reporting verbs, such as opined and emended.
To enable the study of sociolinguistic variables in the spoken part of the BNC, each conversation contains a file header, a statement at the start of the sample providing such information as the age and gender of each speaker in a conversation.
By providing a manually checked, dual POS tag which encodes both form and function (VOICE Project 2013), the XML corpus can be searched for all cases of an "innovative" form, in Cogo and Dewey's terms.
As a result, it is at least technically possible for this corpus to have conflicting constituent trees and sentence span borders for sentence type annotation.
For example, it is possible to collect a series of newspaper articles and make a corpus of them in order to study the specificities of the journalistic genre.
Corpus linguistics is concerned with understanding how people use language in various contexts.
The other form is its 'translation' into a statistical form in mathematical language, which brings me to the issue of operationalization, the process of deciding how the variables in your text hypotheses shall be investigated.
Therefore, sample corpora need to be recollected at regular intervals.
However, if the design had been widely felt to be completely off-target, 2 What is corpus linguistics?
However, because of their availability and size, many corpus linguists use them as resources, and as long as one bears their limitations in mind in terms of representativity etc., there is little reason not to.
However, please always bear in mind that this may make sense in a program that reads texts line by line, such as grep, a Perl script, or most of my own programs that allow you to run line-based concordances, but not necessarily in a stream-based concordancer which usually reads and processes all words as a continuous stream of characters/words and may therefore ignore these markers, or may only match at the beginning or end of the whole file!
If the degree of expansion is low, then the original corpus was already nearly saturated and hence reasonably representative.
Given the recent overarching knowledge-building practices and the methodological roles of corpus linguistics, it is necessary to review how a certain body of knowledge has been created according to the common denominator of corpus linguistics.
The pattern of cited publications also suggests that corpus linguistics has been specialized and branched out.
Corpus approaches to literary language contribute to showing that the relationship between literary and non-literary language is not a clear-cut one.
Second, most existing dispersion measures require a division of the corpus into parts and the decision of how to do this is not trivial.
We'll label the root element for this document 'dialogue' in order to identify our text as a dialogue, and we'll also give it two attributes with the names 'corpus' and 'id' and corresponding values of 'test' and '01' respectively.
There is a variety of very good reasons for this, some of them related to corpus linguistics, some more general.
Knowing all of this, you isolate this one pronoun type because you are interested in the use of first person pronouns (I, me, we, us).
Therefore, the bigger the size of a corpus, the more is its utility, faithfulness, and reliability.
For instance, all of the written texts for the Brown Corpus had to be keyed in by hand, a process requiring a tremendous amount of very tedious and time-consuming typing.
The solutions adopted by corpus compilers vary, from limiting the context shown through the search interface (Mark Davies' corpora) to releasing corpora for download with the sentences shuffled into a random order (COW corpora).
Metadata is what distinguishes a corpus from a random collection of texts by giving it explicit structure: minimally any user of a corpus will know what amount of text data is contained in it, what characteristics texts have, for example, whether they are written for a newspaper or spoken during a conversation with friends or colleagues, who produced the text, and so on.
Another reason for why the number of tokens has risen here is that the hyphen in fact appears to be ill-defined; as in most instances in this particular type of data, it isn't actually a true hyphen as it would appear in hyphenated words or at the end of a line that has been hyphenated, which would not occur in this type of data, anyway.
The first distinction we can make among all the existing corpora is the one that classifies them into a sample corpus and a monitor corpus.
If you are using the corpus for educational purposes and do not plan on selling the corpus or any information that would result from an analysis of the corpus (e.g., in publications), the likelihood of being prosecuted as a copyright violator is usually small.
Because ICE-USA is a general-purpose corpus, only fairly general ethnographic information was obtained from contributors: their age, gender, occupation, and a listing of the places where they had lived over the course of their lives.
The Brown Corpus set the standard for how corpora were organized, and as a consequence, was the catalyst for the creation of several additional corpora that replicated its composition.
And as more text is considered, there is a greater chance (particularly in humanities texts) that new words will be encountered.
However, in this chapter, the scope needs to be limited carefully to computational methods and tools employed for corpus linguistics research.
The corpus has been transcribed in CHAT format and can be downloaded or viewed online.
The smaller the corpora compared are, the easier it'll of course become to narrow down such selections, but essentially, the technique itself is similar to creating basic stopword lists, only that, in this case, a word list from a whole corpus is used as a stopword list.
The development of an annotated corpus is a very time-consuming process.
For instance, in a study of how the Arab revolts were debated in the briefings, the first step was to concordance the names of some of the countries involved, namely, Libya/Libyan(s), Syria/Syrian(s), and Egypt/ Egyptian(s), along with the names of the countries' leaders, Qaddafi, Assad, and Mubarak.
The utility of a corpus is increased by an elegant arrangement of texts in an archive.
Among these systems, XML systems are used frequently since they include both SGML and TEI.
Random effects reflect a random sample of the population we are interested in, for instance, a particular group of speakers from a population of all speakers, or a handful of texts from all texts that could be produced.
Firstly, corpus linguists need to be clear about their own epistemologies.
Don't worry, though, if this all still looks like a foreign language to you -you'll soon learn to understand this better, at least as far as you need to in order to be able to make use of the text contained inside an HTML document.
The question of the optimal size for a corpus primarily depends on the nature of the linguistic phenomenon to be studied.
The chapter calls for more detailed annotation of named entities in already available large linguistic corpora and reminds of the importance of close inspection of the search hits.
Using the corpus was a two-step process.
A special computer program is often designed to process the text and to look at sequences of words in a window of text as they emerge in a corpus.
This is the case because the browser now assumes that, since you've 'told' it that you want to style the XML yourself, it should no longer apply its own built-in style sheet, but instead leave all the styling up to yours.
This is obviously not immediately comparable to corpus sizes given in word tokens since time length does not relate directly to text size: texts may differ in the amount and length of pausing and the speech rate of speakers, so that texts of similar duration in time may exhibit very different numbers of wordform tokens.
To verify this in a very crude manner, I ran another test by comparing the raw and annotated files for my home page (in HTML), one dialogue annotated on a number of linguistic levels by one of my own programs, and one dialogue from the BNC, which contains a rather large amount of meta-information in its header and extensive word-level annotation.
You may now be surprised because, apart from the few general formatting options we've just set for the dialogue itself, all the levels in our hierarchy that we've so painstakingly set before will have disappeared and the text simply runs on without any indication of where one turn or syntactic unit starts and ends.
Particularly if a researcher is oriented towards certain "bottom-up" approaches to language analysis (as in some kinds of corpus-driven linguistics; cf.
At each stage of analysis, to avoid duplication of work, it is most efficient to have a single person work on a text; at the proofreading stage, it is best to have the text proofread by someone not involved with any prior version of the text, since he or she will bring a "fresh" perspective to the text.
There is no consistent terminology to describe research of this kind, but the phrase "Lexical Grammar" directs us to the combination of lexis and grammar embodied in it.
These texts usually contain a number of specific topicrelated vocabulary items that are repeated multiple times in each text.
For example, we can report the number of noun occurrences in the reference annotation that the system correctly identified as such, weighing the total number of nouns in the reference.
However, because the focus of research has in many cases shifted from small, carefully compiled corpora to bigdata resources, the nature of the "data" and methods with which historical corpus linguists typically work has changed.
The second part of the book presents a range of case studies from the domains of lexicology, grammar, text linguistics and metaphor, including variationist and diachronic perspectives.
They offer an opportunity to look inside each diachronic sampling point and analyse variation between individual texts in the historical period.
In many early corpus linguistics works, you will find frequency tables as a primary account of data.
Thus, in 1992, HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) arrived on the scene and became popular very quickly.
Depending on the tokenization of the corpus, this query might miss cases where the word containing the suffix -ness is the first part of a hyphenated compound, such as usefulness-rating or consciousness-altering; we could alter the query to something like ⟨[word=".+ness(es)?(--.+=)?
Part of the reason for this is that, as a practical matter, both can be inserted into the corpus using the same encoding system of tags inserted into the running text.
If this type of search is not enabled by the interface, all the verbal forms must be looked up one by one with their exact forms.
For more general info about how to report the results of a quantitative corpus-based study, see also Chap.
This approach results from a combination of corpus-linguistic and literary arguments.
They observed that this structure was much less used in this second corpus, with only two occurrences by male speakers of Moroccan origin.
We will return to the problem of representativeness in Chapter 6.
However, if tags are present, they can be used instead of or as well as a word pattern -for instance, to search for can as a noun versus can as a verb, or to search for all adverbs in the corpus.
This is legitimate if the goal is to investigate that particular variety, but if the corpus were meant to represent the standard language in general (which the corpus creators explicitly deny), it would force us to accept a very narrow understanding of standard.
But as we will see in the next subsection, we can always specify the exact proportion of counterexamples that we would expect to find if there was a random relationship between our variables, and we can then use a sample whether such a random relationship holds (or rather, how probable it is to hold).
Audio recordings make it almost impossible to grasp this type of information, which later have to be added to the corpus so that the interactions can be understood and analyzed by the experts who will listen to these recordings.
For instance, while a draft version of a text in the category of business transactions is being created, the text is saved as "S1B-071di", the "i" indicating that work on the text is incomplete.
However, as the examples from the exercise will hopefully have shown you, if we use a concordancer to investigate enough data, we're bound to find examples that may run counter to our imagination, and also help us deepen our knowledge/understanding of how words are used, which is one of the reasons why concordances are not only useful for research in lexicology or lexicography, but also as a means for native and non-native speakers to develop their language skills.
Let us repeat the study with the BROWN corpus.
At this age, her type/token ratio was 0.37.
I've chosen extracts from these three particular texts and period for a number of reasons: a) their authors all died more than 70 years ago so the texts are in the public domain; in other words, there are no copyright issues, even when quoting longer passages; b) they are included in corpus compilations; and c) they not only illustrate register/genre differences but also how the conventions for these may change over time, as can be seen, for example, in the spelling of to-day in the final extract.
Between 2007 and 2011, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, which was first published in 1996 and covers the areas of linguistics, applied linguistics, and translation studies, began to be cited widely, ranking until even recent years.
Unfortunately, though, the BYU interface won't allow us to search for these, throwing the following error message "All of the "slots" in your multi-word search string occur more than 10,000,000 times in the corpus (e.g.
The right-hand branch from the top node represents Since there are two non-final, internal splits in the tree, it may be difficult to interpret them in terms of proportions of T and V. To facilitate the interpretation of those splits, one can create bar plots with proportions in each node, including the inner ones: It is also easy to obtain the proportions of T and V in an inner or terminal node by using the function nodes().
No matter the purpose of a corpus collection, all corpora need to provide metadata to ensure that other scholars can also benefit from the corpus.
Finally, note that our final definition does distinguish corpus linguistics from other kinds of observational methods, such as text linguistics, discourse analysis, variationist sociolinguistics, etc., but it does so in a way that allows us to recognize the overlaps between these methods.
All of these are part of the event (invite) and can be linked to it by an annotation describing the named entities involved and the semantic links between them.
Non-corpus-informed materials slightly outperform corpus-informed materials on two fronts: the contextualization of the examples (in 3 cases out of 4, versus 2 out of 4 for corpus-informed books) and the integration of grammar within skills (in 3 cases out of 4, versus 2 out of 4 in corpus-informed books).
For example, we use a different type of language when talking informally to friends than when we are asked to write a research report.
It is also important to stress here that the concepts of source language and source text are becoming increasingly blurred.
We will also discuss a newer method that is becoming popular in corpus linguistics and linguistics more widely, called recursive partitioning, which includes analyses like classification trees and random forests.
On the other hand, there are tools that facilitate the process of manual annotation of data by providing an interface to perform the annotation, as well as a format for representing such annotations.
We'll soon discuss why such issues may arise in tagging.
AntConc has another feature which offers the possibility of generating a list of all the words in the corpus sorted by frequency via the Word List tab.
Imagine a corpus that is overall fairly representative in terms of size and composition, but lacking metadata.
The route proposed should, in our view, maximise corpus linguistics' engagement with disciplines across the social sciences.
A related consideration is whether a study includes register comparisons: some studies compare phraseological patterns across two or more registers; others focus on phraseological patterns in a single register; while some studies analyze a general corpus and disregard the influence of register altogether.
This approach will certainly lead to redundancies; however, redundancy is a small price to pay to achieve a sample that is comprehensive and (nearly) free of bias.
In any type of GL(M)M, the additive linear term consists of a number of sub-terms which are simply added up.
There are only limited possibilities of collocation with preceding adjectives, among which the commonest are silly, obstinate, stupid, awful, occasionally egregious.
Due to many such advantages, criticisms against corpus linguistics, although partly succeeded at the initial stage, have failed to stop corpus linguistics.
The corpus contains 48,569 texts -which are equivalent to web pages herecomprising 52,933,543 wordform tokens.
This mental concordance is accessible and can be processed in much the same way that a computer concordance is, so that all kinds of patterns, including collocational patterns, are available for use.
The concepts that we normally apply for this purpose are representativeness and balance.
These texts were/are essentially created by volunteers who scan or type in the materials, thus converting them into an easily readable electronic format, without any special formatting or layout.
Each individual word in the corpus is assigned a lexical tag (e.g.
In addition, there is an Appendix that contains a listing of all corpora discussed in the text with brief descriptions of their content as well as links to where further information on the corpora can be obtained.
A 'null hypothesis', or H 0 , is a term used to denote the default assumption Null hypothesis of most statistical test, namely that all the variation in the sample data is due to random variation.
Unfortunately, there is simply no space here to give a full account of all the areas of linguistics, and of other fields of study, where the methods of corpus linguistics have been productively applied.
In earlier corpora, the standard was the ASCII (or text) file format, a format that had both advantages and disadvantages.
Save the file as 'practice.xml', ensuring that the encoding is 'UTF-8', and without Byte Order Mark (BOM).
As such, nobody will blame you for releasing a corpus that is still more of a raw diamond.
Throughout our discussion of epistemological concerns, we will note debates within corpus linguistics that echo these debates in the social sciences.
And, last but not least, concerning Sample C, similarly to Sample A, which parts of the text would we be interested in here and how would we extract them?
Therefore, this book also aims to highlight the vitality and richness of corpus studies devoted to French, as well as identify the most important resources which have been developed for this language, in the hope of making a contribution to the rise of this discipline for the study of French.
What is in fact problematic to some extent for processing the text is that these dashes actually look like double hyphens, i.e.
While it is true that annotation processes involve choices that are always partly subjective, many researchers (e.g.
This value is very low and shows that the annotation is not reliable and should be revised.
Corpus linguistics as a discipline has matured in parallel with the development of more powerful computers and software tools.
This is because we have to understand the contents, design and structure of the corpora that we use, in order to select a corpus appropriate to what we want to research, in order to make appropriate use of that corpus, and in order to treat our results critically in terms of how far they may be extrapolated beyond the specific corpus at hand.
Parameters include, for instance, the letter writer's gender, year of birth, occupation, rank, their father's rank, their education, religion, place of residence, any history of migration, their careers and social mobility, the general type of contents of their letters, and how well their letters can be authentified.
Type frequencies are then lower than token frequencies, and the type/token ratio can reveal interesting insights into properties of texts, essentially telling us how lexically variable a text or corpus is.
Concordancing programs retrieve structures and present them in KWIC (key word in context) concordances.
Given the fact that corpus-linguistic data are much more unbalanced and messier than experimental data, it is time that corpus linguists avail themselves of that same family of methods.
The forms of apposition (raw frequencies) 1.5 Forms of nominal appositions (raw frequencies) 1.6 The form of appositions with proper nouns in one unit (raw frequencies) 1.7 The distribution of APNs across registers (raw frequencies) 1.8 APN pattern 3.1 Sample directory structure 3.2 Parse tree from ICE-GB 4.1 Search results for all forms of talk 4.2 Search results for clusters and N-grams 4.3 Search for all forms of the verb walk 4.4 Search results for all forms of the verb walk 4.5 Examples of forms of walk retrieved 4.6 Search results for words ending in the suffix -ion 4.7 Example parsed sentence in ICE-GB 4.8 An FTF that will find all instances of proper nouns with the feature "appo" Linguistic diversity can be found in other types of corpora too.
For example, for a corpus made up of texts written by 20 students, if the word nonobstant is used by three of them, we can say that its dispersion is 3/20, or that this word is found in 15% of the corpus.
In this corpus, there are 14,021 different words (types).
For instance, an explanatory variable can be the genre/register or date of publication of a text as well as speaker's age, gender and language proficiency, to name only a few.
We generate a sixth we have now identified the optimal random-effects structure, which turns out to be much more complex than corpus-linguistic studies usually assume.
Let's consider relevant instances of our case example like in the Brown corpus, given in (7.6): Tagging of corpora is done with a clearly defined and confined inventory of tags (a controlled vocabulary) that is called a tagset.
In other words, taking into account than young men are underrepresented in the corpus compared to old men, there is a clear preference of all men for the of -construction.
These students often ask me what the best statistical test is to use with corpora, what the best collocation measure is etc.
This library is used to parse HTML files and extract plain text.
If you set the argument lines.around to a number greater than zero, then you increase the preceding and subsequent context by that number of corpus elements.
The attitudes of corpus linguists seem to include both a healthy sense of humility as regards what is possible to achieve, as well as an understanding of the need to continuously remind the scholarly community of the core concerns in the field.
Most relevant for general linguistic concerns is the register perspective on text varieties since this offers important insights into the functionality of linguistic structures in use.
I argue that the specific issues encountered with this database are due to fundamentally different ideas of what might constitute "good data" in the fields of Digital Humanities and corpus linguistics, respectively, and this in turn leads to different expectations regarding how the data is made available to researchers (e.g., Mehl 2021).
Consider first the issue of accuracy in document-level metadata.
Only a closer examination of these features in the corpus can provide us with evidence to support the analysis.
Furthermore, there are some new trends in corpus-based research that Rissanen could not have anticipated in his article, and these introduce challenges of their own.
Incorporating text dispersion into keyword analyses.
Corpus linguists should avoid trying to explain to the programmer how the task should be completed, e.g., saying that they want the programmer to create a program that opens each file, tokenizes the content, and then counts the frequencies of each word.
The types of corpora (and corpus-related resources) that we consider are the following: 1   1.
Most phenomena that are of interest to linguists (and thus, to corpus linguists) require operational definitions that are more heavily dependent on interpretation.
To obtain frequencies or examples, one must engage with the corpus or 'query' it.
Check the results and try to understand why this feature may be so useful… Tip: If you have problems in getting upper-and lowercase characters sorted separately, open the 'Tool Preferences' for 'Concordance' and check the option for 'Treat case in sort'.
This definition is close to the understanding of corpus linguistics that this book will advance, but it must still be narrowed down somewhat.
By reference to a specific research question, you will learn how to build your own corpus and then analyze it using both the register functional analysis approach covered in Chapter 2 and the corpus software programs covered in Chapter 3.
Each text then will have other, "extra-textual" features as well.
These tools also help us create a list of all the words in the corpus, sorted by frequency.
For the first option, the more advanced BootCaT command line scripts add another stage where further seeds are extracted by comparing the initial corpus with an existing more general corpus, e.g.
Importantly, only a sample of candidate predictors is randomly drawn for each individual CITs.
For instance, students' attitudes or reactions were examined regarding consultation with corpus while they were writing.
The point of this case study was not to provide such an explanation but to show how an empirical basis can be provided using token frequencies derived from linguistic corpora.
The third type usually either specifies formatting instructions, such as line breaks, etc., contains links to external resources, such as a style sheet that specifies the layout and formatting options, or can be used to include other information that doesn't require a containing element, such as, for example, a comment on a specific piece of data.
Imagine you have a sentence with an SGML word-class annotation as in the BNC.
Other tools operate as client-server systems over the internet: the user accesses a remote computer via a client program, typically a web browser, and uses search software that actually runs on a remote server machine where some set of corpus resources and analysis systems has been made available.
Finally, the corpus should contain young speakers recorded under similar conditions in order to avoid any context-related bias.
The 'Methods' section of a corpus-linguistic paper also needs to contain information on how the notions/concepts considered relevant for the analysis were operationalized as variables and how annotations were added with regard to the variables that may affect the linguistic phenomenon under study.
Finally, we will present the principles to be respected in order to make annotation sharing easier.
Hence, corpus-based typologists need to carefully evaluate the specific properties of the corpora they use vis-à-vis the phenomena they are researching.
Of course, in order to turn this into an operational definition, we need to specify a procedure that allows us to assign the hits in our corpus to these categories.
Just as most corpus-linguistic work has been done on English, this chapter has so far also been rather Anglo/ASCII-centric.
If you are dealing with multiple file formats, exporting or converting everything to plain text format is probably the simplest way to compile it all together.
How would you create a balanced corpus of them?
As in the heading of this chapter, we frequently encounter two different terms when talking about the process of storing and enriching linguistic data, markup and annotation.
For example, researchers can use the Corpus of London Teenage English to determine the characteristics of teenager English.
A welldesigned corpus includes texts that are relevant to the research goals of the study; are saved into a file format that allows different software programs to analyze the texts; and are labeled with enough relevant contextual material so that the different contexts are easily identifiable in the corpus.
The observed proportions are calculated by taking, again one-by-one, the absolute frequencies of the word or phrase of interest in the corpus parts and dividing these by the absolute frequency of the word or phrase in the whole corpus.
Methods and tools for corpus linguistics have developed in tandem with the increasing power of computers and so it is to the computational side that I look in order to take a peek into the future of corpus software.
Of course, XML doesn't need to be viewed inside a browser or transformed in any way, but can either be viewed, or even -at least to some extent -meaningfully searched, in one of our basic editors, or manipulated in other ways through programming languages, too.
Very similar discourse is often found in corpus linguistic literature in support of a corpus-based approach.
The question of representativeness is therefore essential so that a corpus can be used for answering a research question.
In both these cases, automatic tagging tools have been shown to be less accurate and robust.
In the case of the noun Salaün, its presence in the keywords of the corpus can be explained by the fact that Salaün was a general delegate of a road prevention association who had taken part in an interview that students had to discuss in one of their assignments.
For example, the Universal Dependencies project is managed entirely on GitHub, including publicly available data in multiple languages and the use of GitHub pages and issue trackers for annotation guidelines and discussion.
Practical considerations are also relevant when it comes to the processing and annotation of data collected in a documentation project.
Equally, it would be of great benefit to the research community if the metadata for already existing spoken corpora could still be made available, for example for some of the older ICE corpora.
Both of these have their individual sections for restrictions further down the page, to allow you to narrow down your choices, based on domain information for the context-governed type, and age, social class, and sex of respondents -not the speakers, whose characteristics can be selected separately -for the demographically sampled data.
This is well below the level required to claim statistical significance.
However, an annotation can be tested from the point of view of its reliability.
Two broad alternatives have been proposed in corpus linguistics.
Each bootstrapped sample has the same number of observations as the original sample.
However, this study would require the assembly of a corpus which tangibly represents the legal language, such as court decisions, because these writings properly match the targeted field of study, that is, the legal language.
The perspective of these studies tends to be descriptive, often with the aim of showing the usefulness of collocation research for some application area.
Consequently, to adequately reflect gender differences in language usage, it is best to include in a corpus a variety of different types of conversations involving males and females: women speaking only with other women, men speaking only with other men, two women speaking with a single man, two women and two men speaking, and so forth.
Just seeing the results may also not yet allow you to see the usefulness of creating/using this type of class, but this will soon become clearer when we introduce quantification.
After all the above information is collected, it can be very useful to enter it into a database, which will allow the progress of the corpus to be tracked.
First of all, the 1 in Construction 1+Lemma+Givenness is R's way of encoding the fact that an intercept is part of the model.
Thus, if the user chose "XML" then menu made that a 1 and switch then assigns TRUE to xml.version.
Very few of the existing techniques are tailored for the specific methods in corpus linguistics, and in addition, the existing corpus visualisations do not scale to large bodies of texts, a key requirement to tackle the growing size of corpora.
For instance, the COCA treats all clitics as separate wordforms whereas the Brown corpus (and other corpora developed in that tradition) treat clitics plus their host as a wordform.
The major difference between creating and analyzing a corpus, however, is that while the creator of a corpus has the option of adjusting what is included in the corpus to compensate for any complications that arise during the creation of the corpus, the corpus analyst is confronted with a fixed corpus, and has to decide whether to continue with an analysis if the corpus is not entirely suitable for analysis, or find a new corpus altogether.
All these decisions and the availability of existing conventions and annotation tools can make a significant difference to the overall process of annotation that follows.
While it is available in a machine-readable format, it is too short to be representative of the types of sentences occurring in news stories, and whether the random sampling of sentences produced a balanced corpus is questionable.
The sample used here is the Diachronic Electronic Corpus of Tyneside English (henceforth DECTE), a collection of interviews with Tyneside English speakers that will be fully described in due course.
Note that in order to compare type frequencies, we have to correct for the size of the sample: all else being equal, a larger sample will contain more types than a smaller one simply because it offers more opportunities for different types to occur (a point we will return to in more detail in the next subsection).
But corpus linguistics is also used for conducting research in fundamental areas of linguistics such as the study of syntax, since it makes it possible to identify the types of syntactic structures used in different languages.
Additionally, many measures of frequency and predictability that require bigram/ n-gram information will be skewed heavily by the data available in a small corpus.
However, the notion "hapax" is only an operational definition for neologisms, based on the hope that the number of hapaxes in a corpus (or sub-corpus) is somehow indicative of the number of productive coinages.
This is a context that can be assumed to trigger either the use of some form of pronoun or zero across languages, regardless of the overall content of the texts involved, and hence it will make sense to compare rates of pronoun versus zero within this 'envelop of variation' (Torres Cacoullos & Travis 2019 on comparisons along this type of context) (cf.
Corpus linguists are interested in how linguistic data is conditioned by context.
Consequently, his style of speaking has drawn considerable interest from corpus linguists.
Although the comparison of such wildly different subcorpora in terms of size is, admittedly, not very useful in general, the list of unique items in the written component immediately reveals a number of interesting features of the BNC tagging and composition, or rather, the way BNCweb allows you to work with them.
But there are also names that differ in frequency because they differ in popularity in the speech communities: for example, Mike is a keyword for BROWN, Michael for LOB.
The perspective that we will take is, as you can tell from the title of the book, related to an area of language study called corpus linguistics.
In particular, it is often the case that the default workflow for accessing a specific archive is not ideal to tackle corpus linguistic research questions, which may make it difficult to compare results to previous work.
Type in dialogue, followed by a set of paired curly brackets.
Obviously, the distribution of such pairs or sets with respect to other words in a corpus can provide insights into their similarities and differences.
With the state of the art in corpus-pragmatic research established, we now turn to a more fine-grained discussion of exemplar studies in the areas outlined above.
For example, in the CLAPI corpus, the contributions from the different participants are presented one below the other.
After all, the problems discussed here are not specifically corpus-linguistic ones.
Our first examples concerned problems related to part-of-speech annotation, and these challenges are hard to overcome entirely.
Again, as 'human consumers' of the text, this will not cause any processing problems, but for the computer, the, The, and THE are in fact three different 'words', or at least word forms.
Unlike many other areas of linguistics, there is a fairly clear difference between corpus-based and corpus-driven research on phraseology, and both approaches have been applied productively.
Before a multi-dimensional analysis can be performed, a corpus needs to be both lexically tagged and then analyzed by a particular statistical method termed factor analysis.
The idea behind this sampling frame was to ensure that the corpus contained samples of speech representing the ways that people speak in different regions of the country and in different contexts.
Although for the most part, white in references to the White House is tagged as a proper noun, there are also some instances in BNCweb and COCA where it is tagged as an adjective; particularly in COCA, there are altogether 1,497 hits (searched August 27th, 2022) with this tagging, showing various combinations of capital or lowercase spelling of initial letters of white and house (mostly referring to the building in Washington D.C.).
While much of that work has, of course, been successful because, for example, high token frequencies in b and c are positively correlated with high type frequencies, and high token frequencies in a are negatively correlated with clumpy distributions, it is unclear how potentially skewed the results are for cases where those correlations do not hold.
Part of the corpus has been part-of-speech tagged.
What the lists give us, first of all, is a sense of the 'aboutness' of the corpus.
We need a greater understanding of how particular genres are used within specific contexts, adding a focus on "action" to balance the focus on "language" by including research techniques such as interviews and observations in what Swales calls a "textography" (Swales 1998) 3.
This means that the transcription of spoken/signed texts needs to contain fairly meticulous special annotations for characteristics of text production.
Metadata capture properties of the (written) corpus text (text format, encoding, script, structure of annotations, etc.
The other type abstracts a new and usually much smaller set of variables on the basis of the existing ones.
It is not possible to use traditional gender-distinguishing words such as lovely (preferred by women in informal British speech), because in the whole corpus (over 6 million words) there are only 20 occurrences of lovely.
Looking now more closely at the list of lemmas, we note that among the 3,196 lemmas meeting our inclusion criterion there are 13 lemmas related to weather (this analysis had to be done manually by going through the lemma list): cloud, cold, flood, heat, hot, ice, rain, storm, sun, temperature, warm, weather and wind.
In Chapter 7, we will see that errors can be systematically annotated in a corpus, in the same way as syntactic or semantic information is provided.
We may, for instance, have annotated an entire corpus for a particular speaker variable (such as sex), and we may now want to know whether the corpus is actually balanced with respect to this variable.
Add the line <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> at the very beginning of the file.
You may well notice that the header (<head> in HTML) generally doesn't really contain any part of the text itself, but simply stores meta-information, i.e.
A similar thing can be done by expanding abbreviations to their full form, but with both lemmatisation and expansion, one always has to bear in mind that the individual forms may potentially also cause a change in meaning of the whole textual unit in which they occur, or may have been used deliberately as a (stylistic) feature of a particular type of genre.
Thus, it is probably a good idea to formulate at least some general expectations before doing a large-scale collocation analysis.
Though it is acceptable to quote portions of a text while indicating its source, these quotations should not exceed a clearly defined size limit.
On the other hand, they are part of the text, they cannot simply be removed, as this may reduce the context or even render the text illegible.
Indeed, we speculate that in years to come, much, if not all, pragmatics research will involve corpus linguistics.
In practice, every keyword (or lockword) identified should be related back to what we know about the composition of the two corpora (C and R) and the multiple sources of difference between them.
If corpus linguistics wants to retain its scientific status, it should not be content with statements such as 'this feature was found in a large corpus that is, however, not available'.
This solution can be realistic when creating a corpus drawn from a limited number of sources.
These choices we have when using language can really only be investigated through finding ways of expressing this flexibility on the paradigmatic and syntagmatic axes in our corpus searches.
There are two types of errors that we can commit in rejecting the hypothesis: Type 1 and Type 2.
Although Matukar Panau is an agglutinating language, we see that by token frequency, most words are monomorphemic or bimorphemic in an 8,961-word annotated corpus.
Answering either of these questions involves answering the other, as the notion of a 'corpus' in contemporary linguistics is inextricably tied up with the ideas and techniques of corpus linguistics.
However, those who wish to compile a corpus involving complex types of information or do advanced types of (semi-)automatic corpus searches would be helped by collaborating with a computational linguist or computer programmer (see Chap.
In principle this can be done by using the symbols of the IPA to render the corpus text.
Unfortunately, considering the plethora of textbooks in the field, it is the practical aspects of this process that are dealt with least out of the three key phases of corpus-linguistics methodology.
Thus, corpus comparability needs to be addressed in a critical evaluation of ICE for the study of World Englishes.
The Web as corpus, seen here through the lens of Google-based searches Finally, we will consider very large "hybrid" corpora, which take data from text archives or the Web, but which then deliver this data through powerful architectures and interfaces.
For more information regarding regression-type approaches, see Chaps.
Since the 1960s, a yet more specific meaning for the term has emerged: corpora in this sense are very large, machine-readable collections of spoken and written text that are analysed using computational methods.
Another measure of central tendency is the median, placed at the middle of the different values found in the corpus, so that the data set is divided into the lower half and the upper half.
According to Chomsky, another problem related to corpus linguistics stems from the fact that corpora are not representative of the language as a whole.
As far as possible, the chosen tag sets should be based on annotation standards which have been broadly accepted in the literature.
Recall that the observed median animacy in our sample was 1 for the spossessive and 5 for the of -possessive, which deviates from the prediction of the H 0 in the direction of our H 1 .
We believe, however, that a note of caution may be in order before concluding that the lemma should be what all lists should consist of.
In other words, a longer text will, on average, contain more instances of any item or feature simply because it is longer.
There are a number of available spoken corpora that contain face-to-face conversation, for example, the London-Lund Corpus (LLC), Cambridge and Nottingham Corpus of Discourse in English (CANCODE), the British National Corpus (BNC), the Lancaster/IBM Spoken English Corpus (SEC), and the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English (SBCSAE).
The Oxford Collocations Dictionary for Students of English is the only one of the three collocation dictionaries which is corpus-based.
Ideally the transcription that is produced by these different methods would be aligned with the audio and video streams using software such as EXMARaLDA and the NITE XML Toolkit.
Imagine a study aiming to compare the use of passive sentences in spoken and written modes, and finding 67 occurrences of passive sentences in the spoken corpus versus 3,372 in the written corpus.
In corpus linguistics, we are almost always dealing with nominal data.
Finally, thanks to the existence of a corpus of oral data, corpus linguistics also makes it possible to answer questions related to phonology and sociolinguistics.
Collocational statistics quantify the strength of association or repulsion between a node word and its collocates.
This chapter will guide you through the steps and procedures to actually put the corpus to use and to report on your research findings.
So a word may be a hapax legomenon because it is a productive coinage, or because it is infrequently needed (in larger corpora, the category of hapaxes typically also contains misspelled or incorrectly tokenized words which will have to be cleaned up manualy -for example, the token manualy is a hapax legomenon in this book because I just misspelled it intentionally, but the word manually occurs dozens of times in this book).
The question of course is whether corpus work really lives up to expectations, with benefits sufficient to justify the investment.
For expository reasons, we are going to look at a ten-percent subsample of the full sample, giving us 22 s-possessives and 17 of -possessives.
These files would be immediately ready for inclusion in a specialised corpus for both individual classes and a group of classes.
However, this section adds an additional challenge: The corpus from which we want to retrieve sequences of two adjectives is not tagged.
Perhaps most significantly, corpus approaches to academic writing provide insights into disciplinary practices which help explain the mechanisms by which knowledge is socially constructed through language.
Such variables are common in variationist corpus linguistics that focus on predicting linguistic choices when two alternating variants of a particular feature are possible (e.g.
Of course, we could theoretically check all examples, 3 Corpus linguistics as a scientific method as there are only 42 examples overall.
This written form is what we treat as the corpus text since this is what can be searched and further annotated.
Following this indication that corpus work could help these learners expand their lexicons, a scaled-up version of the project was prepared using two levels of learner, both experimental and control groups, two outcome measures corresponding to experimental and control conditions, and a learning target of 200 new word families per week for twelve weeks (or 2,400 words, roughly the number these learners would need to have a chance of reading for content in English).
One thing that corpus linguists should be clear aboutas should researchers using any method or set of methodsis that while a corpus can answer a range of questions worth asking, it cannot answer all questions that a researcher may reasonably have.
The median token frequency is 1 morpheme, the median type frequency is 2 morphemes.
In order to do so, we need to identify the subset of constructions with of that actually 4 Data retrieval and annotation correspond to the s-possessive semantically -note that the of -construction encodes a wide range of relations, including many -for example quantification or partition -that are never expressed by an s-possessive.
Software tools such as Voyant and MONK are designed to allow large quantities of text to be searched, analyzed, and visualized alongside other tools such as Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Social Network Analysis (SNA).
As tagging longer texts may take a fairly long time, let's first prepare a relatively short sample.
Google) or a dedicated concordancer (e.g.
This corpus should be specific to the population of French-speaking Switzerland.
Let's explore this a little further by looking at another of the currently bestknown tagsets, the CLAWS (Constituent Likelihood Automatic Word-tagging System) C7 Tagset, which is already far more detailed at 152 tags, exceeding the 48 tags observed in the Penn tagset by 104 tags.
Stubbs does not present the results of his procedure in detail and the corpus he uses is not accessible anyway, so let us use the BNC again and extract our own data.
Researchers in the field of applied linguistics, and more specifically, in discourse analysis, have defined and distinguished notions of register, genre, and style when it comes to text analysis.
However, would we say that this person is "doing" corpus linguistics?
Conversely, phenomena such as the structuring of information within discourse and the analysis of global coherence are much more difficult to annotate on a large scale since they require an entirely manual processing of the corpus.
A key concern in corpus linguistics is to explain the variable use of wordforms and other structures in dependence on both types of contextual factors.
This corpus contained one million words of edited written American English divided into 500 samples representing different types of writing (such as fiction, technical prose, and newspaper reportage).
First, we will discuss some facts that need to be considered before deciding to create a new corpus and highlight the advantages of reusing existing data whenever possible.
The green ones rank as the top 501-3,000 most frequently occurring words in the corpus, and the yellow ones are marked for those that are in the rank of less commonly used vocabulary in the corpus (beyond the rank of 3,000).
Another example is the Oxford Corpus of Old Japanese (compiled by Bjarke Frellesvig and colleagues).
In (7) to (11), taken from COHA's sister corpus, the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), all the "nouns" in boldface are used in a descriptive and non-referential function (i.e., similarly to key and fun in Examples (1) to (4) above), and yet none of them has been annotated as an adjective in the corpus.
The chapter concludes with a detailed description of various kinds of textual markup and linguistic annotation that can be inserted into a text.
Once you have understood and maybe fixed the instructions in the loop and want to execute it all in one go, then just type the real beginning of the loop (for•(i•in•1:3)•{ ¶) or copy and paste from the script file.
This problem can be handled with annotation during the actual transcription of the recording that marks certain sections as inaudible.
If we compare the reports of university students with a year of the Le Monde newspaper rather than the rest of their academic work, the keyword list includes élèves, activité, formation, réflexivité, écriture, évaluation, résumé, pensée, enseignants, savoir, etc., because the topics covered vary more widely between the two corpora than between the different types of university work.
Although they are not necessarily viewed as such, some existing techniques in corpus linguistics can be considered as visualisations.
Obviously, the MPC would be a less prototypical corpus as well.
Whenever it is feasible, we should use existing annotation schemes instead of creating our own -searching the literature for such schemes should be a routine step in the planning of a research project.
Hint: the number bigram tokens in a corpus/string will always be one less than the number of lexeme tokens.
McIntyre and Walker (2010) built a corpus of 200,000 words from blockbuster film scripts.
However, we are also aware, when we do this, that we cannot be certain about the population, only about the sample.
At this age, his type/token ratio was 0.38.
This is relevant because it comes with various preconditions, and leads to different goals for corpus linguistic work.
A corpus representing a specific genre can be relatively small, whereas general corpora need to be much larger.
To summarize, there is no one way to deal with all the variables affecting the gender balance of a corpus.
Nevertheless, looking for elements in a corpus, even a computerized one, by using a simple word processing tool is rather inconvenient.
For instance, a general corpus of newspaper editorials would have to cover all the different types of editorials that exist, such as oped pieces and editorials produced by an editorial board.
Corpus linguistics can be defined as an empirical discipline par excellence, since it aims to draw conclusions based on the analysis of external data, rather than on the linguistic knowledge pertaining to researchers.
Various types of metadata can be placed in a separate file or in a 'header', so that a computer script or web-based tool for example will be able to use the information in systematic ways when counting frequencies, searching for or displaying relevant data.
The main point really is that interested users have access to the data and can understand how it can be used, which in turn requires metadata on the corpus as a whole.
The notion of the lemma should be differentiated from the concept of the lexeme, which is used for defining a word from a semantic point of view.
This chapter is dedicated entirely to the discussion of collocation.
Participant metadata, data about each individual, including names, ages, genders, languages they use, and perhaps, occupation, education level, and other characteristics.
This is no small task, but it tends to be underestimated by beginner corpus compilers.
In order to validate this percentage, a second random sample was generated to check consistency.
Each sample cluster contains three representative tweets published in Montreal and occurring in a single original cluster output by our analysis.
But including spoken language in a corpus is very important because spoken language is the essence of human language, particularly spontaneous conversation.
There is a function file, which establishes a connection to a file and allows you to specify an encoding argument, and that connection will then be read with a function called readLines, which does exactly what its name suggests.
Corpus linguistics, by contrast, is not concerned uniquely with any single facet of language, but rather is an approach which can be applied to many or all aspects of language.
On the one hand, corpus linguistics focuses on data observation as found in collections of texts, recordings, etc.
Since each research has a specific goal, a special corpus has to be designed accordingly.
SFK_018 or IOM_002) where the token occurred.
In this regard, increasing the size of the corpus that is used will not automatically solve the problem.
For example, one of the occurrences of the word colline (hill) in the Le Monde corpus (year 2012) is "Sur la colline, tout le monde est allé voter" (On the hill, everyone went voting).
In some national laws the speaker can withdraw his or her consent at any later point 11 Spoken Corpora 251 in time, which poses serious challenges for corpus dissemination.
Among the paragraphs, we also encounter one special type, that of the heading, which acts as a kind of guide to the particular chapter or (sub-)section the individual paragraphs occur in.
But there are many challenges involved in creating "small and beautiful corpora," such as the British National Corpus (BNC) and the International Corpus of English (ICE).
On the other hand, if you have a ready-made concordancer, you click a few buttons (and enter a search term) to get the job done.
For the dative alternation, the model includes the text ID, the register (which nests the text ID) as well as the lemma of the theme argument and the verb.
For example, in order to create a corpus of French, speakers from different regions should be included in the sample.
Finally, this corpus should contain a synchronic type of data, corresponding to the current pronunciation, rather than to its diachronic evolution.
We can start enumerating the differences between the texts by pointing out that text A is about American politics, while text B is a part of a story about a person called Rincewind.
At this point, we concordanced month-by-month the items violence and side(s) and the co-text of the resulting occurrences were read.
The Bergen Corpus of London Teenager English (COLT) contains the conversations of adolescents aged 13-17 years.
This happens quite often in corpus-linguistic research.
The cross-sectional portion of the corpus includes 136 texts written based on the same image description task, by learners from the initial level to the advanced level, and by a control group of native speakers.
The development of corpus linguistics has led to the creation of new methods for collecting and analyzing linguistic data, which were made possible thanks to the development of computers and the arrival of the Internet.
When corpora can be downloaded, a concordancer should be used in order to explore them systematically.
XML is a hierarchical format (that lends itself well to representation as a tree that does not allow cross-nesting/overlapping) in which you add to data markup and annotation in the form of either start and end tags (which may contain attribute-value pairs), or just start tags (with attribute-value pairs), and in fact you have seen examples above that are similar to that annotation already.
A corpus is useful to observe the variation of these properties in constellation with each other and see how each of these independent variables tend to affect our dependent variable.
Clearly, the texts need to share relevant characteristics (or variables) that meet your selection criteria for inclusion in the corpus.
This is necessary because, often, the formulation of the hypotheses in text form leaves open what exactly will be counted, measured, etc.
Lesser-studied languages typically lack these things, and here corpus linguistics often means to build corpora in the first instance, and these corpora will then often be relatively small, which then comes with various restrictions as to their usability in research.
For example, it is very common for research teams to offer the corpus compiled during their research projects as a tool available to the general public, once the project is finished.
This is referred to as lemmatisation (c.f.
Moreover, privacy rights require corpus compilers to anonymise the disseminated data (cf.
However, their size is the only argument in their favor, as their creators and their users must not only give up any pretense that they are dealing with a representative corpus, but must contend with a situation in which they have no idea what texts and language varieties the corpus contains and how much of it was produced by speakers of English (or by human beings rather than bots).
This explains in part why documentarians' work differs from that of classical descriptive and typological linguists in its primary focus on data collection rather than analysis and comparison, and creating a corpus is part of a documentation project.
Take for instance the frequency of adjectives in 11 fiction texts taken from the British National Corpus (BNC) used as an example to calculate the mean in Section 1.
Thus, a monitor corpus becomes a worthy representation of texts that are ever produced in a language.
When we are satisfied that the scheme can be reliably applied to the data, the final step is the annotation itself.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our proposal, and Section 3 contains information regarding studies based on corpus compiled with this tool, as well as the description of future lines of action.
For this information to be made available for future users of the corpus without separating it from the rest of each sample portion, it should be possible to include it in the files, but in such a way that it is not taken into account by a concordancer when counting the words of the corpus.
Traditional corpus consultation is in some ways a relatively marginal activity, to be found in few classrooms around the world.
Nine covariates are tested, which represent such social factors as the sex, age and education level of the speakers, and such linguistic factors as polarity, type of determination and proximity of the copula to its referent.
Another solution, which keeps the structural and discourse units of a text together even more, is to divide the text into its paragraphs, or multi-paragraph chunks.
Thus, the importance resides in the comparability of the design of the two corpora from which the lists were culled rather than the "quality " or impact of the texts in the corpora themselves.
In very basic cases, the language of the corpus is rearranged so that a reader is presented with an altered and focused view.
In the future, we recommend investigating the use of statistical power calculations in corpus linguistics.
However, it is at least incomplete, if not inappropriate, because it pretends that the 2,321 data points are all independent of one another, which we know they are not: they exhibit inter-relations because they were produced by fewer than 2,321 speakers, because of the lexical items in the verb-particle constructions, and because of the levels of corpus sampling.
However, this very heterogeneity could skew the results of our general collocational statistics rather strongly, especially in such a small corpus.
In the case of children with ASD, it is important to write down the different indications regarding the linguistic profile of the recorded children and to include them in the metadata, since autism represents a broad spectrum of skills and deficits which could lead to comparing children with very different linguistic and cognitive profiles.
Thus, if we are dealing with a variable that is likely to be of general interest, we should consider the possibility of annotating the corpus itself, instead of first extracting the relevant data to a raw data table and annotating them afterwards.
It is also on this level that clause boundaries are inserted that mark the beginning of clauses, represented by '##' or '#' , depending on the type of clause.
To get a list of the names of all the available colors, type colors() in the code editor and run the code.
However, despite the fact that interrupted words are very common in spoken language, even that of highly fluent speakers, the CLAWS tagset provides no tag for this, something that is probably due to the CLAWS tagsets originally having been created for the morpho-syntactic annotation of written language, and later adjusted for spoken language to some extent.
Write three 5-gram sequences in English that you think may have a chance of being repeated more than once in a corpus.
We will then provide more details on exactly which type of information is presented in the corpus-informed books, but also how is it presented.
One particularly interesting type in the table in this context is wilt, which, on the surface, would appear to be an archaic form of WILL, so we'd expect to find more occurrences of it in the humanities texts.
Conversely, tagging can disambiguate the words: break is both a noun and a verb, and broken is both a participle and an adjective -POS tags allow a computer to distinguish the different grammatical functions.
Given the logic outlined in Sections 2.2 and 2.4, that means that the baseline probability of CONSTRUCTION: V-Part-DO can be different for each of these random effects; in other words, the model allows every corpus part (at each level of corpus organisation), every verb and every particle to have a different baseline 'preference' for CONSTRUCTION: V-Part-DO.
For example, the s-possessive occurs 22 193 times in the BROWN corpus (excluding proper names and instances of the double spossessive), and the of -possessive occurs 17 800 times.
We then briefly presented a number of corpus-and non-corpus-informed grammar books and carried out a case study on the treatment of the passive in those two types of grammar books.
For instance, personal letters are often less than 2,000 words, and a text sample can be comprised of complete letters totaling 2,000 words.
These approaches extend or develop categories for the analysis of literary texts and/or show how corpus methods are relevant to the study of textual meanings.
The virtue of working with a standard published corpus is that the corpus serves as a common basis between different researchers -allowing results to be tested and replicated by other scholars, for instance.
An example for the organizations mentioned in the corpus is shown in the figure below.
Allowance for an additional layer of comparisonbetween different layers of annotation -allows for an integrated and informative perspective on social cognition aspects of language.
In other words, the high token frequency of -icle tells us nothing (or at least very little) about the importance of the affix; if anything, it tells us something about the importance of some of the words containing it.
